Interview 001 Feb 23, 2018
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewee: Of course, no problem. 
Interviewer: Okay. I’ll just do that now…so I’ve already sent you the consent form, hopefully you’ve had a chance to review it. Do you have any questions? 
Interviewee: Yes, but I didn’t sign it. I wasn’t sure, there were two categories. And the reason I didn’t sign it, I didn’t quite understand which one I want. It doesn’t really matter to me if you use my name or anything. I don’t have it in front of me right now. But I looked at it and it wasn’t super clear to me which one. 
Interviewer: Yeah. 
Interviewee: If I consent to give you all of the rights and you can use whatever you record in whatever way – which one shall I sign?
Interviewer: Well because weren’t not going to meet physically at this time, I’m going to ask for consent verbally on the recording. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: So I won’t have to get the signature from you. 
Interviewee: Okay, then you have my consent, yes.
Interviewer: I appreciate that. So the second part was around contributing the transcript to open data. And what I’m going to do is leave it, I’m going to send you a copy of the transcript and at that time, I’ll ask you, “Is this something you want to make available as open data and do you want your name as part of it?”
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: And then you’ll be able to make that decision then. 
Interviewee: Sure, okay. That’s good. 
Interviewer: Okay, thank you.
So I’m going to start with a few preliminary demographic information and then ask you a few questions more about your teaching practise. 
[Demographic info redacted]
Interviewer: Great. So now I’m going to ask a little bit more questions about your teaching practise. Are you familiar with the term “Open Educational Practises” or how are you defining that?
Interviewee: Well, I am familiar in that term. Also aware that different people see it differently. I mean, from my understanding it’s anything that’s out there on the internet and then there is a differentiation I understand also that some people view open as something that can be used and modified. Other people just think if it’s on the internet then even if it cannot be easily modified, it’s still considered open. As long as you can access the URL without any password entry, that’s open. So it can be a little bit more open and a little bit less open depending on what the source and what the definition are we talking about. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m really interested in how, as I said before, it’s changing how and what we teach. So can you comment on how you might have used some of these philosophies in your own teaching?
Interviewee: Mhm. Well I developing the first open, what I considered open, online teaching resource. I started developing it in 2003 which is really long time for that kind of material and it was finished in 2004. So first time my employment did that in one of my courses, this Introduction to Soil Science course was 2004 and it was an online supplemental material for that course and because it’s an introduction to soil science, it has concepts that are relevant for even upper level courses. So at that time it was a website with materials, self-study quiz, a glossary, and various figures and tables and photographs, and all of that. And that was, as far as I know, at that time first material of its kind in soil science that went on the internet. Because it was covering the broad topic of just the basic science principles, basic soil science principles, it became quite popular because it was open, anybody could use it. From the get-go I didn’t really feel – these were days, at [institution name] at least, of WebCT one of the…or no, was it Vista? Now I don’t remember which one came first. But blackboard software that was used for course management. Which was on its own innovation in those days, but I didn’t like that because so much because whatever you’re posting – whatever Vista, or WebCT – it was password protected. And for my students, it was okay to use it while they were in the course, but as soon as they leave the course they lose the access. And I didn’t like that idea because I teach also upper level courses in soil science and I knew from the get-go that, if nothing else, for my students it would be beneficial to have some material on their disposable that they can use later on in their education and probably beyond.
So that was really the beginning. I developed that for that one specific course. I made it open in the sense that it was on the internet, you didn’t need any kind of password protection to access the material. My main driver at that time was I want my students to use this later on, as opposed to locking it in WebCT or anything else and then over the years I learned how A) popular it became and then B) how many other uses for that material people were having for it. For example, not just people from other countries, but also people in federally-driven – or federally-funded institutions like Agriculture Canada, they had lots of summer students and not all of those students necessarily have soil science backgrounds. So, lots of my colleagues because they became aware of this material, they make their students to do a refresher or a quick, kind of, self-study course by using this material. Or for various professional development opportunities in various professional organizations like BC Institute for Agrology for example, or BC Institute for Forestry people would be using this as a refresher. And those, when I developed the material, were really low on my radar as potential uses. Which really over the years, for that one particular material which I developed, really confirmed what I kind of had an inkling at the early days that this “Open” is the route to go. And ever since then, everything that I developed is really open. There was only one, and I knew it’s not the right way to do it but I just didn’t know how else to approach develop something – database of soil science questions that could be used in tests – but everything else besides that project is open. I personally don’t care if people modify it for their own purposes as long as they find it useful, I’m happy that they used it for that. Otherwise it’s for nothing. Soil science, it’s a small field, so I never really thought of commercializing anything. I’m an academic, that’s not on my radar. We soil scientists usually joke we do what we do for glory, not for becoming rich. So really, I never – I never even thought of that. And I guess what solidified that in my mind, there were also colleagues from the University of Alberta who tried to commercialize something similar ahead of me, actually, and because it was closed and he was trying to charge fee, it really didn’t take off. The market is small, we’re not in it for money. I kept everything open and I still keep it all open at the moment. And the link that I sent you has a compilation of everything we’ve developed so far. So it’s there for people to use. It’s developed with different learning objectives and different courses in mind, and uses in mind. But as I say, everything is open and I sincerely believe it should be. 
Interviewer: Have you had students involved in creating and working with these materials as well?
Interviewee: Absolutely. For every single project, yes, I had students on the team. Either I would hire them as contributors to develop the material, or in addition to that I would have them as reviewers. I’ve been lucky because at [institution name] there is, and have been for a really long time I believe since early ‘90s, we’ve had the fund called “Teaching and Learning Enhancement Fund – TLEF” that is meant for innovations in teaching as long as it’s in some direct way contributing to enhancement and learning of [institution name] students because the fund is actually created from a portion of student tuition. So a portion of student tuition goes to this fund and it has to be a clear contribution and also clear involvement by [institution name] students in these projects. So that’s how I got my first grant for this first project and for several others. So – and I mean, I always thought I had to take – involve students because the fund required that, but I also thought if you are developing something for students and users, you better involve them in the process of developing that. So yes, every single project I had undergraduates, graduates, combination, as participants. 
Interviewer: Do you feel it’s impacted other ways in which you teach? You know, some of the components of teaching – when we think about learning design we think about learning outcomes, the teaching strategies that we use in the classroom, and how we do assessment. Are there any other aspects that might have changed?
Interviewee: Oh, definitely. Just to give you one most recent example: one of the things that I teach in this Intro Soils course is classification of soil. Soil classification is probably not the most sexy topic. Soils are really notoriously hard to describe. It’s really coming down! It’s snowing very hard. It’s not easy to see the differences amongst soil types. The differences are very subtle. So one of the topics and one of the projects that I had is to help students learn about this classification and early on I started developing various video materials with experts in different parts of BC because it’s easy to access where different soil types are, and they’re talking about how one goes about classifying, pointing to very specific clues that you need to use in soil classification. So that was the beginning and then in this recent project then I had a graduate student who as a part of his master’s thesis developed, with the help of online developers and graphic designers and content experts and educational developers that we have at [institution name] and also at SFU here, he developed an online teaching material which we then – and around then he developed the whole lab for that specific topic that we included in this Intro to Soils class. And then while we were finishing his project we realized we came across – through some contacts at [institution name] studios – we came across a software and developing company in Richmond that develops an app. So this is – I’m describing something that was happening five years ago when apps were still not as common as they are – anyhow, so we developed an app with this company’s help which is open, it’s called “Quest to Go” and we added a self-study activity for students. So, kind of organically we developed a scaffolding method, how to teach this mundane topic. So I introduced the topic as I always would in the class in the lecture, then the students come to the lab and they have hands-on activity that they do in support of video material that my graduate student – former graduate student –developed. And then they do – they have to review the material in order to finish the lab assignment, and then with the last step when hopefully their knowledge is really solidified then they can do something independent. We send them with this mobile app to the [institution name] farm which is about…it’s on campus, and we have forest over there. So we are lucky because at that forest we have a location that are close by, like between 200 metres from each other, where there are two soil types that they can identify by using the app. So we developed the scaffolding approach to this topic. As an instructor you’re giving them all the guidance, you are the content expert, and then as they progress through the activities you remove the support more and more, which culminates with this activity where they’re doing something independent and they’re also using their beloved phones, which also is a trick on my part to send them to the forest by using the phone to make them look into the soil, describe the soil, still using the phone. And that last activity is out of the scheduled class time, so it’s on their own and it’s optional and I give that for bonus points, and I’ve been doing this for three years now and I just recently wrote a paper about it, so I can give you a link to that. But it’s quite popular. About half – just over half of the students take it even though it’s on extra time and just for bonus marks. But they really like it. There’s a little bit of competition going on because groups, they can do it in groups or individually that’s up to them. But they give the group names and there is a score board in the app, and if there are several groups playing at the same time they can see as soon as they score for a correct answer, the points show up in the score board, and they can see also ranking of the groups. So there’s a little bit of competition going on which adds a little bit of fun to the whole thing. So, that’s one example. Okay, that’s a long answer. 
But yes, that’s how technology did change how I approached my teaching and really opened opportunities that without technology I wouldn’t have. 
Interviewer: And the students engaging in this way has been fairly positive?
Interviewee: Oh, absolutely. Absolutely, they really like it. They – I was surprised how many went and how engaged they got. There were glitches, every year there are some glitches in terms of do they understand the instructions or not? But they really like it. They find it to be fun. And again, as I say, it’s an optional activity, it’s for just small bonus points but they are very happy to go and do that. And I thought, again, at the beginning that was more of an issue than today. I thought oh well okay do they have enough phones to do that? Not an issue. Even with the constricting that the app is only designed for iPhone, not for Android, even with that it’s not a problem. Because they can play in groups, they can play in groups they actually like that. And another thing, this Intro to Soils course is a first year course, another benefit I thought for them would be to send them to the farm, they know about the farm, [institution name] farm is kind of an iconic thing that students saved in 2007, there was a big rally because [institution name] wanted to develop it into housing and students rallied and really saved it, and it’s a really wonderful place to have on campus. But first year students, turns out usually in their first year haven’t been there yet and this gives them a reason to go. So that’s an additional benefit of having activity like that. They go in groups, they organize by themselves, I don’t meddle with that, I just tell them “find group members and let me know who is in what group” and they really like it. It’s a very positive exercise. 
And it’s positive because yes they go out and they use phones, but it really shows them that they are in a span of couple weeks they learn something that’s tangible that they can use in the life setting, real life setting. Most of my students are forestry students so this is – they know that this is an activity that they will definitely do in their careers. So it’s empowering to show them, or to give them opportunity to do something like that even in the first year. So I think that’s an additional reason why they like it. But I would have to do a survey of them. We did a pilot study in the Forest Ecology course with the same app but different activity, and in that course there was an undergraduate student, my TA actually, who wanted to do the survey and to do a little study and the survey and the students were really positive. 
Interviewer: So are you getting them also to contribute their learning and what they’re capturing as part of the soil web resource?
Interviewee: I’m just starting to do that. I have another project – this is an ongoing project – I posted all my material for this course in [institution name] Wiki. So it’s a platform that [institution name] basically got from Wikimedia and everybody who is either staff or faculty or student at [institution name], they have some campus-wide login number. Everybody with that number, which is quite a login password basically, can add material into [institution name] Wiki. Anybody can see it, all our material, but without that login number you can’t modify it. But students do have these numbers and they can. 
So I just – just last week started asking who added the material in this I call it “Soil Web 200,” this open access material that I developed in 2004 and modified and updated in terms of platforms and software where it is, right now it’s all WordPress, so I’m asking for another bonus assignment, my students to edit it or if they don’t know how to edit it or they want to add something to let me know, and to write a brief 250 word assignment how it should be improved. Another thing that I’m asking them is to contribute to soil in news page to find articles that are related to soil, to submit the URL but in addition to just telling me “oh I found this,” they have to again write a short explanation or rationale why is that specific article relevance for the material that we are covering in this course. So it’s a little more than “oh I found this, I want the bonus point.” 
And then just for fun there is a third bonus assignment. I am asking them to do soil memes. So…and I count them for that as long as it’s soil related and it’s courteous, so I am okay with that. So they can post all of those three things in [institution name] Wiki. And that gives them additional bonus assignments. Basically, those three put together will be worth one regular lab assignment. So it’s not much. I’m really curious to see how many takers there will be for this. I didn’t want to open it sooner than last week because I thought well if I start asking for this too early in the course when they’re just learning, it’s too soon. So we made the decision, collective decision on this project team that we should wait for half of the course and then kind of open it up. So I really don’t know – I’ve seen a couple of posts and we have a reading break right now at [institution name] so this week is bad, nothing is happening. We’ll see what happens next week and onward in terms of that. I’m very curious. So that will be a direct involvement where I’m directly asking for them to contribute to the material. And this will be collective group of students who are taking the course right now. 
Interviewer: Excellent.
Interviewee: Because before when I said that I had student involvement I would recruit them specifically, even if they did the voluntary work, but I tried to pay them even a little bit through various options, we have some options called Work Learn and Summer posts for students, those were the ways how I would preselect a small group of students and give them a paid assignment. But in this case it’s open for everybody in the course, whatever they think. We’ll see. It’s to be continued. 
Interviewer: I will be looking. I will be checking in on the Wiki to see how that plays out. 
Interviewee: If you do a google for [institution name] Wiki and APBI, which is a code for most of soil courses, APBI 200, you will find our page. The beauty of [institution name] Wiki is it really has the same format as Wikipedia, so my whole material for the course – everything but marks, literally everything for this course including the lab manual, including my lecture notes, it’s all at [institution name] Wiki. So you or anybody else can see it. Obviously my students can see it. And this is another example of technology that I use in my course. Again, going back to not liking the course management system being the closed system. Yes, I understand privacy issue and marks, I use that for marks for their assignments and exams. But everything else, why should that be closed? So I post everything in that. I mean students can see that later on, but even what I discovered younger colleagues from other institutions who don’t have as many resources or supports as we do at [institution name] have benefited from this because I’ve been doing this – okay [institution name] Wiki maybe not, but this first material was beneficial for numerous of young colleagues that I have across Canada because it was already there, so when they came and became professors in soil science they could use that material right away. Modify it, or not, but it was there and it was really useful. 
And I think that’s another advantage of having open resources. Because we as instructors can learn from each other as opposed to hiding all of this, “this is just my hidden secret” way how I teach, I think because of the open resources and that route or option, we can share way more and I think we can become better instructors. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I know that our Forestry department at Vancouver Island University has benefited as well from the accessibility of those resources.
Interviewee: Oh I know, and one of the – he was a post-Doc at the time and when I was finishing – when I was developing this initial Soil Web 200, the initial project zero, or resource zero in my case, he was a post-doc at [institution name] and he actually worked on the initial development. He became assistant professor at University of Vancouver Island, but unfortunately he passed away a couple of years ago. I don’t know if you heard of him, David (unclear last name)?
Interviewer: No, I don’t. 
Interviewee: He was in a biology group be he was doing forestry research, so…that’s an unfortunate thing. But there is a little bit of connection with that, with Vancouver Island University, I guess. Anyhow, it’s multifaceted useful to have open resources. I find, as I said, I’ve been involved with it for fourteen years, and just learning new and new ways how such material can benefit beyond your initial intention why you are developing it. 
Interviewer: So you’ve mentioned a bunch of facilities that have helped you along like the grants, and the Wiki, and the WordPress system that you’ve got. Are there other forms of infrastructure, hardware, software, space? You mentioned the farm. Are there other facilities that help you – that you draw upon in your practise for open education?
Interviewee: Well, I mean, yeah. We have the Centre for Teaching and Learning at [institution name] and I was lucky because I somehow got introduced to them from the very beginning when I got my post as a tenure track assistant professor back in 2002. So I met them very quickly, or met some of them very quickly at the very beginning of my post at [institution name] and they’re very open for cooperation and to help faculty members who are interested to innovate with technology. And because they are a centre, there are numerous people with different kinds of expertise, so even if you know one person who is maybe not expert in area that you want, for example, if I want to do an assessment or a study on material that I developed, developers with whom I would develop the material would not be expert on evaluation, but there are other experts so in transition to finding an expert between their centre is very quick and they’re all very, very keen to collaborate or help me as an instructor to develop, to implement, and to evaluate what has been developed. So, the reason I was able to go to different projects and try different things is because I kind of tell whomever I am working currently, “I have this new idea for something in the future,” and they immediately will tell me, “this person between the Centre is whom with you should talk.” And it’s very simple like that. So there is an expertise and there is easy access to that expertise that I have on my disposal at [institution name]. So that was really instrumental to be able to do all of these things. 
And in addition to that, because as I keep saying, not every institution in BC or Canada where soil science colleagues are has this. Through various collaborative projects that I had with my colleagues to different things because some of them were not just developed at [institution name], or lower Fraser Valley. We went up north, or to the Island, or southern interior, or we went to Rocky Mountains. In those other projects I involved people from various institutions and it precipitated and it went to – or spilled over – and went across Canada. 
So its beneficial that – I mean what I have at [institution name] became beneficial for my colleagues at other institutions. And again, [institution name] is really as a – you know I sound like I am a paid promoter – but it really is a forefront in innovation in open technology, or technology period because just last year between [institution name] they opened an emerging media lab, which is now focused on these multimedia like virtual reality and augmented reality and they’re getting the technology that’s really out there, cutting edge, that very few other universities in the world are using. And they had several pilot projects last year. They’re trying to – they got some initial seed funding from Provost’s Office at [institution name] and just a month ago we had the – there was a presentation for our President from [institution name] who showcased was the capability from that emerging media lab. So he can go out there and get more financial support from organizations like Microsoft, for example, like Google. Because a couple of these initial projects were funded by Google. So it would be useful to see can we get funding for that. 
So that’s the next step, or current step. And again, [institution name] is kind of pushing for that. And since I had a huge, or ongoing, collaboration with [institution name] Studios and CTLT, I’m involved with that so I already have a mini project on 3D topographical app (again) where students actually that this emerging media lab is organizing to get projects while they’re still obtaining undergraduate degree, I got two undergraduate students from computer science who are developing an app for how topography influences the formation of different soil types. I mean, and for this I didn’t even have to apply for any funding, I just had an idea. I went to one of my colleagues in this emerging media lab and told him, “this sound really interesting,” and he says, “oh yeah, we can do that for you. And here are your two students!” And I’m like, “really? This is even easier than I ever had to apply for anything.” And I – they’re developing it. So I think it will be ready in a month.
Interviewer: So it sounds like at [institution name] there’s a bit of a norm forming around this sort of practice? 
Interviewee: I think so. I think so. 
Interviewer: I often wonder how the work you’re doing and other open educators relates to the academic plan and how we – the mission and vision of the university. Do you have any comments on that?
Interviewee: Oh it’s very well aligned. I mean that’s a very good point you brought. It is. It’s definitely been a mission, or one of the key goals that [institution name] has been striving towards in its plan or mission. So and it’s not a new thing. It’s been a while. I’ve been at [institution name] as a faculty member for now sixteen years. During those sixteen years it’s been part of the mission strongly. So, and it shows. I mean, having the fund to innovate in teaching that was established in 1991 shows having a Centre for Teaching, Learning, and Technology also since probably late ‘80s that’s grown and keeps growing and keeps bringing these cutting edge innovations. Finding the ways to keep that current and how to involve students. This latest example, and it’s really just from last year and this emerging media lab and how – not just they got funding for these technological innovations which is on its own wonderful, but how they managed to set up this structure in which the undergraduates are truly part of the initiative is really brilliant because they brought undergraduate students from computer science, from creative arts, from various arts departments because these are the people who are designing the visual part of the games or apps, or whatever virtual reality someone is creating, and they’re gaining while they’re undergraduate students, they’re gaining such a variable experience. And they’re being also mentored by people in the emerging media lab, that they treat us as instructors as clients. Which is really nice to see because these two students that came to me, that were assigned to my mini project really come to me and treat me as a client. And it’s like, “wow okay this is really nice.” They’re so organized, they want to have timeline, they have to have goals, and we have to meet every month, and they show me progress, and they ask me questions like where we want to go. It’s like, “wow!” And that’s not my doing, they came prepared. So that tells me that somebody who is in the emerging media lab gave them that training. And that’s completely relevant because when you think about where they will end up doing, they will be in gaming industry or these multimedia industries out there, and they will be dealing with clients. 
So anyhow it’s really exciting what’s going on. 
Interviewer: It seems to me that, you know, promoting access to knowledge, building knowledge, engaging students in construction of knowledge, and then making sure that’s publicly accessible, those are kind of at the heart of the mission of the university, I believe. 
Interviewee: Yes. Absolutely. 
Interviewer: It seems that open educational practises are a way to get at and actualize some of those things. 
Interviewee: Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean I can give you another example. So, I mean things have really evolved over these fourteen years. And for me and my initiatives. Again, I can’t believe I’m looking back at fourteen years ago when I was at my project zero, I really had – the only intention I had then was I want this for my course. But it really led to another initiatives, and another initiative led to another initiative. So this collaboration on these open educational projects that I had really allowed me to get to know my soil science colleagues. And yes, we collaborated and we continue to collaborate on these projects, but it also gave me a realization that we need a structured platform for educational collaboration in soil science. 
So in 2014 I actually initiated a soil science education committee between our Canadian soil science society and that formalized that platform. So it’s not only about open education, but open education was the pre-cursor for that. And now with this platform we have something where we identified ourselves who we are. It’s very ad-hoc and very grassroots and that’s why it’s working I think. There’s not mandate that somebody above is saying, “oh you must do this.” No, it’s like “I have an idea.” So this survey of Introduction to Soils course was my idea. I wanted to know as an instructor of that course what others are doing. So I said, “how about doing this. Who wants to join me?” Six of them joined me and we created a study. Out of that another colleague of mine said, “Oh I want to find out the means of the industry and government in terms of soil science classification and identification skills. So he’s now leading another initiative. 
So it really sparked an opportunity for us to have a platform, we have a dialogue, we have now regular – at our Canadian Soil Science Society Annual Meeting, we have every year a session where we talk about our educational projects. Which before we didn’t have. And that really came out of this initial cooperation and open resources that we had. Without it I don’t think it would happen. Maybe it would, but much later than it happened. So that’s another unforeseen benefit of having this open resources because once you have things out in the open, people are really much more keen to, if nothing else, engage in the dialogue with you and right now one of the other outcomes, I said one of the outcomes was interviewing students, but another one is that we should really develop a Canadian e-book textbook for the intro to soils course. We don’t have that. We don’t have even a Canadian regular textbook. We are using one that’s from U.S. which is really good, but it’s full of U.S. examples and for this collaboration it’s just came on our radar, well how about we organize ourselves and instead of writing just a typical book, we are going to purse – because there is now a couple of my colleagues from Saskatchewan – who will be taking upon them to lead that project, that it will be an e-book. So…we’re kind of, you know, you have to provide the platform to people to start interacting and don’t restrict it too much. Don’t restrict it, period, and people will collaborate. If it’s already close. If it’s not already close, well then it dies. But this – we all knew for a long time, we being soil scientists, it’s definitely worth – worthy cause. It’s just we were not organized enough. 
Interviewer: I was curious about your own teaching philosophy and beliefs about knowledge. Are those driving your work here as well?
Interviewee: Oh, of course. I mean, especially being an instructor in soil science, that shapes you in a certain way because – okay I have a question for you: have you heard of soil science?
Interviewer: Only because I’ve worked with our Forestry instructors at [institution name]
Interviewee: Ah, okay, you see? And that’s a – I mean, the usual answer to that question is no. And unfortunately it’s been like that for really long time. We’re talking decades. Maybe when most of the students coming in soil science are coming from agriculture, rural backgrounds, maybe they be aware that there is such discipline, but now that they are mainly urbanized population worldwide, we don’t even think there is such discipline. And when I asked my students in the first class, “how many of you heard of soil science?” Maybe twenty, thirty percent if I’m lucky would say yes. The rest is no. And that’s been like that for a long, long time. 
So teaching a discipline that’s barely known. Teaching a course, the Intro to Soils course which is a required course, and teaching a subject when you hear about it, it’s really not sexy. It’s not evoking anything interesting just on the surface. So in that context of my discipline and where it sits in – and also this is not a discipline that students really get exposed to in their previous education like high school and elementary school, it’s not covered. Or if it’s covered, it’s covered in a very shallow way in passing amongst other subjects. But most that’s another reason why students really don’t know about it. So I have lots of hurdles to go through in my first course. So, it became very obvious to me from the get-go that I have to have something to catch them besides the exciting part of the discipline, but I can’t waive my hands when they have all of these notions in their heads: they’ve never heard of it, they think it’s ugly, boring, “why am I here? It’s forced on me.” 
So that’s why I immediately knew, I have to go to internet when I started teaching because in those days, 2003, internet was in. It was ‘it.’ So that really was obvious. I have to be there. If I’m not there, I’m losing them fast. And that’s why I continued following the trend, that’s why I’m in the app and mobile games, and whatever is the trend – that’s why I’m going to the virtual reality in a hurry – because if nothing else, I’m showing that this generation of current students that “yeah, we soil scientists are not dead beat people! You know, we follow these trends.” And I’m packaging the material as much as I can in these new trends so that they at least see, not at least, but they see that it’s packaged in an exciting way. And then I can start hitting them with other relevant parts about soil science and why it’s relevant. Once I catch their attention, then I can sell the message that a for a terrestrial species, I mean there is no other more important medium to study than soil. But, if I start with that without anything and I use chalk board and old textbooks and nothing else, just paper, and typical lectures, I don’t think I would, if you want, sell the message as quickly or efficiently as I am doing it this way. 
Interviewer: So it’s a way to get at engaging students. 
Interviewee: Absolutely. And in a discipline like mine, which is really not on the radar, I think that’s very, very important. I mean, if you teach genetics or if you teach something that’s already on their radar…or it’s more cuddly, you know? For whatever reason it’s more appealing than soil science. Maybe you can, but for my discipline, it’s absolutely essential. So yeah, that definitely shaped, I mean, what was the – you know, ‘chicken and egg’ – what was first? Was the realization of my science prompted me to go into these open resources and new technologies? I’m not a techy person really myself. I don’t come from the side, “oh I’m using this, I love this on my own, and that’s why I’m implementing it.” I think I’m actually coming into it because of the need of my discipline and working, as I said, over fourteen years with it, it just solidified my belief that it’s absolutely necessary for my discipline. Again, might be different for others. But for mine, definitely. 
Interviewer: Excellent. That covers just about everything I was hoping to ask you. Are there other things you can think of that you might want to mention? Or things I haven’t asked today?
Interviewee: Um, let me think. Well, one thing – another thing that I’ve done, again I never really thought I would do this, but I also realized, again, over fourteen, fifteen years now that I’ve been working on this – I started with this development and obviously use of these open educational resources, but then very quickly I realized a) I have to promote them. Others need to know about them. So, very quickly I started presenting at our soil science conferences about material we’ve developed, and others, I mean I’m not the only one. I mean I’m talking about me because it’s my experience, but there are other colleagues in Canada and worldwide that are doing similar things. But it started about the same time, because I think that’s where the technologies were becoming more broadly available to us. So it kind of started emerging in early 2000. 
So we started presenting, and I remember in the beginning I remember…which year it was…2008? No it must have been earlier than that. Doesn’t matter. Let’s say early 2000s I wanted to present about this Soil Web 200, they didn’t know where to slot me at the Canadian Soil Conference. Okay it’s a soil science subject, they really liked my proposal or abstract, I’ll talk about this material, but where do I go? And you end up in a mish-mash section called ‘General Soil Science’ sectioned with anything and everything because there was nothing on that topic. So, okay so I went and I presented and that was great, and that gave me an idea. Okay we need to have a session on soil science education. So next year, I think that was in 2008 or 2006, I put in a proposal for soil science session – education session. And I was so excited and it was great, and I recruited maybe two other people to present, and there were five people in the audience. And it’s like, “oh this is not good.” 
So I learned my lesson. So I realize, okay if I want to put the session, I have to recruit more presenters in advance. So I can’t open it and think they will come. No. You have to solicit these presenters in advance. So next time when we had the session in 2010, because I did this prep work we had a full classroom and then it came on the radar. 
So what I’m trying to say is the development of these resources on its own and their implementation is good, but it’s not enough on its own. You really have to promote them to the relevant audience and you promote them in many different ways. Scientific conferences is one way. You have to write about them. So another thing that we started doing, we started writing. And this is – I come from a natural resource discipline, I’m a soil scientist by training and that’s where I do my research, but here I am now trying to write about what I developed, trying to evaluate what I developed, and those at the beginning were the hardest papers I had to write, because I didn’t know where I’m going. It’s just, “Okay we did assessment. Okay we have some data. I have no idea how I structure the paper!” The first paper in that area was the hardest one that I had to write because I really had no sense of direction. And yeah, okay, and you try to go and find the help and all that, so it’s not an easy path because it’s a completely different discipline. Yes, it’s about soil science and education resource I developed, and I’m using but how you explain the data is very different. And it’s everybody else that I’ve seen and I talked directly had this issue: how do we publish? How do I assess this? Because all of us are soil scientists, so it’s a different discipline, really. Then we have to find these people at our universities who do this kind of research. So, you really have to follow it all the way through to promote, to tell others, to publish, to push forward, to establish the journals that will publish this. Because again, like with that conference when you want to publish, where do you publish? Sometimes, you know, we have these traditional soil science journals and, you know, first time around you send them a paper on the educational resource, they’re looking at it saying, “I don’t know what to do this with this.” I mean we are over that hurdle now, but those were all hurdles along the way. So…and you have to have these networks of collaboration, so it really – this is a world that I really didn’t have on my radar. But it came to my radar because of these projects on open education. And I think in long term, it will make my discipline way better than it was thirty, forty years ago when I was an undergraduate student or even before that. So it’s exciting! 
Interviewer: It gives you a chance to talk about how you’re teaching soil science or approaching – 
Interviewee: Absolutely. 
Interviewer: Yeah that’s an emergent discipline: the scholarship of teaching and learning. 
Interviewee: It really is. It really is. And it’s now – I mean the same, very similar what I described to you for the Canadian Soil Science Society and how things emerged, and then a very similar thing happened in the American Soil Science Society which is the largest national Soil Science Society in the world. We have International Soil Science Union that now has an education section. And all of those started to emerge in early 2000s to mid-2000s because that’s where the technology – I think really technology was the precipitating factor for allowing us to develop stuff in a different way, and then once we started developing things it became obvious we need to share, we need to talk about in order to see what others are doing. Are we on the same track? How can we advance? And it’s a continuing thing. Now I’m involved in a project, international project, where we are assessing – or will be assessing, the plan is – is there a difference, cultural difference, from different parts of the world in terms of how we teach soil science?
Yeah. So I mean I got involved because I’m very curious to learn is there a difference. So, anyhow – and again, one thing leads into another and it’s – I think it really was precipitated by technology that allowed these new pathways.
So there you are. That’s a nice summary. 
Interviewer: Yeah, you mentioned earlier and just now some of those papers that you’d written. If there’s anything that you think would be interesting for me to have a look at, don’t hesitate to send them to me. 
Interviewee: Sure. If you go to SoilWeb.ca, that link I sent you, there is a page called ‘References.’ 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: They aren’t all listed, maybe the last one. Last two are not. Take a look. Maybe that scaffolding project is not described. That one is…I’m just waiting for final word that it’s been accepted. It’s preliminary accepted, but I think it will be. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: And one an Intro to Soil Science is accepted. So it’s officially in press. But everything else that we published, it’s already in there. So if you can’t find them yourself, let me know I can send you something that’s interesting. 
Interviewer: Will do. 
Interviewee: Yeah, so. 
Interviewer: Alright well we just passed the hour and I don’t want to take any more of your time. I really appreciate you taking the time. It’s been fascinating. I think I was very fortunate to get to hear you reflect on your experiences. So I really appreciate it. 
Interviewee: Yeah, you are most welcome. Do you need more people for the interviews? 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m targeting eight to twelve interviews. I have a harmonized ethical review accepted, so I can access a number of different institutions. I’m trying to make sure I can get a couple from each so that it’s somewhat representative. 
Interviewee: And are you targeting instructors, or are you targeting developers as well?
Interviewer: Most of my interest is in instructors who are changing their practise because of Open. I thought instructors are hard to get time with because they’re so busy. So I did have an idea that maybe developers might be useful as well. But it might be quite a different perspective. So I’m focusing on faculty primarily. 
Interviewee: Mhm. Okay. So do you need more contacts for instructors? Or do you think you have enough? Because if you do need more, I can suggest you some names. 
Interviewer: At [institution name]? Or…?
Interviewee: Well from [institution name], I’m just thinking I know several from [institution name]. They’re not soil scientists, but they are early adopters of technology that might be of interest to you. In terms of soils, if you want more soil science people from other universities, I can probably think of some of those names as well. But only if you need more people. 
Interviewer: Yeah, it’s often helpful, you know, if you know someone and say, “There’s a researcher and we had a discussion and they may want to talk to you as well.” Because sometimes I’m just cold calling. They don’t know who I am, or…I know a few people at VIU that I hope to work with and some others at other institutions. Let me follow up with you? I’ve got a sort of preliminary list, and if there’s a need for more I will reach out to you. Yeah. 
Interviewee: There are two that are coming – that are in my mind are people who pilot – were PIs of these two pilot virtual reality projects, so if you want somebody doing something really out there and cutting edge right now as we speak, and these are…well close to be finished projects. So, that’s whom I had in mind. One is in medicine and the other is in physical geography. So, completely different. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m definitely interested in going across disciplines and see where this fits. 
Interviewee: Yeah. Both of them are from [institution name] but, anyhow. It’s up to you, decide what you want. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I will follow up with you. And if there’s anything you think you want to mention, or ask, or you can email me freely. I’ll – 
Interviewee: I would be interested in, down the road when you are done with your study, what did you find? What are the reflections? I would be interested to hear about the outcomes. 
Interviewer: Absolutely. 
Interviewee: To read the paper. You better write a paper. 
Interviewer: That’s the point of the three paper thesis is to not write the massive dissertation, but to do concrete studies that can be published. So I absolutely intend to publish, and I absolutely will – hope to make it an open access publication. 
Interviewee: Yeah, yeah. Where are you planning to send them? Do you know? 
Interviewer: I have some journals in mind, but I don’t know exactly where they’ll fit. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: There’s journals that are educational technology journals, but many of those journals are now moving towards talking about how open education and open technologies are part of a landscape of educational technologies. So there’s quite a few avenues to share. 
Interviewee: Mhm. Okay. Good! Well good luck with that. It’s quite exciting and I think it’s needed, what you are doing. 
Interviewer: Oh, I appreciate that. Thank you very much. 
Interviewee: I would definitely be interested. 
Interviewer: I will definitely follow up with the results. 
Interviewee: Good. Yeah, okay. If I think of something I’ll let you know, if you think of something else that I can help you with, by all means. 
Interviewer: I really appreciate that. 
Interviewee: Yeah. As you can see I’m all for it. 
Interviewer: Yes. You’ve got great energy for it and it’s wonderful to see. 
Interviewee: Oh, yeah. I’m a believer. I’ve been convinced it’s the way to go. It really is. It’s not one project, it’s numerous projects. So, yeah. Good. 
Interviewer: Okay thank you again. Take care! Don’t get snowed in. It hasn’t started in Victoria yet. 


Interview 002 Feb 23, 2018 – An interview with Louis Mattar who consented to being named in the research 
Interviewer: So the other thing is that since we haven’t met together, I haven’t – I won’t be able to get your signature on the consent form. So what I’m asking for is verbal consent here in the interview now that we’ve got it recording. 
Interviewee: Sure. I give verbal consent for you to interview me today. Thank you.
Interviewer: Thanks, I really appreciate that. 
Interviewee: No problem. 
Interviewer: So you might want to just have a look at the consent form later. There’s an option there. I’ve made – there’s an option to make the transcript openly accessible to others with your name or with not. These are optional. I’m just trying to contribute some of the data to sort of the open source movement. 
Interviewee: Makes sense. 
Interviewer: I’ll give you that option when I have you review the transcript when I’ve actually transcribed it, so you don’t have to decide right now. And it’s as I said completely up to you. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: I’m going to ask a couple demographic preliminary questions and then we’ll go into more talking about what you’re doing.
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: So this is February 23. Would you be willing to identify your age?
Interviewee: I am 36. I’ll be 37 in April.
Interviewer: Cool. Would you be willing to identify your gender?
Interviewee: I’m a male. 
Interviewer: Are you willing to identify your ethnicity or anyway that you contribute to diversity in society? 
Interviewee: I am Caucasian – I identify as Caucasian. I have an Irish mother and a Lebanese father. 
Interviewer: Cool.
Interviewee: That’s a weird mix!
Interviewer: Can you identify your role or job title?
Interviewee: I am a professor in sport health and physical education at Vancouver Island University. 
Interviewer: Yeah so you’ve answered the question about the department. So, thank you. And your speciality or subject area?
Interviewee: I’ve got a background in Kinesiology focusing on cardiovascular and neurovascular control of those systems. 
Interviewer: Great.
Interviewee: Sympathetic control of those systems. I forgot that part. 
Interviewer: And can you comment on your employment configuration? Are you sessional? Tenure track?
Interviewee: I have a full-time, permanent position at Vancouver Island University. 
Interviewer: And it’s a teaching or a researched-focused position?
Interviewee: Teaching focused.
Interviewer: Some of these questions I kind of know the answers to, but I just want to make sure that I ask. 
Interviewee: You’ve got to make it – you’ve got to get it all on the books. 
Interviewer: Thanks for coming along with me. And how many years of experience have you in teaching post-secondary? 
Interviewee: Six if you don’t include the work I did during my PhD. 
Interviewer: Yeah, so you’ve got some experience beyond your teaching – you were teaching as a PhD grad?
Interviewee: I did a little bit of TA work and a couple of filling in for lecturing for faculty members who I knew who were unable to do certain lectures of their courses. I never taught a full course while I was doing my PhD but I did a number of – I got a university teaching certificate through the Teaching and Learning Centre at Western and that included a number of things to prepare to do teaching at the university level. So while I didn’t teach any full courses while I was doing that, I did have a number of opportunities to prepare documents, you know, syllabi…what are the other things that teacher people do? 
Interviewer: That’s okay, so we’ll probably say about eight years.
Interviewee: I’d probably say closer to seven.
Interviewer: Okay. That’s cool. 
Interviewee: Just in terms of five years here at Western – sorry at VIU – one year at Western, Washington in Bellingham and I’d say a total of a year combined during my PhD. 
Interviewer: Cool. Now I was going to talk a little more about your practises. As you know, I’m really interested in how “Open” in sort of – or “Open Education” is changing the way and what we teach. Do you have a way that you’re defining the Open Educational practises?
Interviewee:  Um…well I think about it in a few different ways, I think. The first coming to mind is open textbooks and making information available to students in an open way. So, I include links to open anatomy and physiology textbooks in my courses that I teach and I provide students with the option to use that rather than the publisher’s textbook. Going that route to an open text is something that I’ve been playing around with, but because it’s a combined text with another course and we just got a new faculty member in our department whose also teaching in these areas, it’s just a little…it’s fluid right now to go that way. It’s something that we’re looking into. 
The other side of the coin in terms of openness in education is the actual pedagogy. How you go about teaching and how…I become less of the holder of knowledge and more of a conduit through which students can access that knowledge, and…I don’t know. Do you want me to go further? Do you want me to talk about stuff that I’m doing? Or will that come out in the interview? 
Interviewer: No, that’s really helpful. I think that’s one of the reasons I’m trying to do this research is because so much of it right now is about adoption of resources and content and we’re interested in, like, how we teach and meaningful learning for students. So I think that’s the gap that I’m trying to fill in the research. So we’d focus maybe on that end of it. 
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: I think you’ve probably got some good examples there. 
How long has this been on your horizon?
Interviewee: Um…it’s probably been on my radar for about four years. I don’t know if you’ve connected with [colleague name] or not? So, he – through him is probably the first time I really got interested in Open Texts – Open Education. He wrote a chapter for a Chemistry help and Chemistry text and the Chemistry department has since adopted that. But he and I play hockey together and so we would chat about stuff and through the course of the summer he was writing this book and we had just chatted about it. And through that I became more aware of what it is and what options are available and just sort of started batting around ideas for ways to incorporate it, or try to incorporate it, to make education more affordable for students, and that’s probably one of the big drivers I would think for the Open Education movement. The content and the knowledge is out there, so let’s let people use it, but also doing it in a way that is accessible for all regardless of income or status.
And so through [colleague name], maybe four years ago, I started looking into it, becoming interested in it and there have been a number of opportunities to try to include it in courses or to become more involved with it. Some of them have gone through and I’m working on some right now, and some of them have, sort of, fallen to the wayside for various reasons. 
Interviewer: Okay. And maybe you could tell me about some of the ways that its permeated into your practise?
Interviewee: Sure. Well, currently my new course it’s Advanced Anatomy PhEd 301. The basis of this entire course is on designing and building an Open Anatomy textbook. So through the first part of the semester is, sort of, an intensive Anatomy refresher for all of my students where we dive deeply and we’ve spent the last – I think we’re week seven right now – so we spent seven weeks covering an entire semester’s worth of anatomy in a great amount of detail. And then the rest of the semester we are building an online textbook through WordPress and it’s being done in an open online way. So every student will have access to every other student’s posts and material and content. Students were assigned various body regions that they were responsible for and students have to work together to ensure that the terminology that they’re using, that the boundaries of the anatomical regions are synchronous and don’t overlap too much. I’ve had students – we just, sort of, we just did the assignments of these body regions and some students were very happy, some students were less happy with their regions, but I let the students, sort of, negotiate how they wanted to go about doing it. If they wanted to trade or exchange segments. So for instance, once student wasn’t happy with his original region switched with someone to get something he was a little more interested in but still we really wanted to try to tie his – the article that he was going to write with something that was a little more meaningful to him. And so through conversations with him and with a few other students during class time we – he decided that he was going to take a section from somebody else and write that part and they were just going to exchange in terms of what they were going to do. 
So it’s really the students are working together with one another and it’s all going to be online and hopefully by the end of it we’ll have something that we’re really proud of and we’ll be able to make public and share it with the wider world. And that’s something I’m going to have to get consent and all of those things from students to make that happen. But it’s an ongoing process right now. So that part of my project is half of their grade. The other half being, sort of, traditional anatomy exam. 
Interviewer: The student that wanted to make it more meaningful for them, who approached you and said, “Can I do it this way?” Did that happen because you made that opportunity available? Or does that happen where you get students…?
Interviewee: It’s been a little bit of both. A couple of examples: so, one example of a student coming to me and saying, “I’ve got this idea. What do you think?” So she’s interested in becoming a Naturopath in her research in preparing to do the application she’s seeing increasingly that through nutrition – the effects of nutrition and exercise on hormones is a really big part of that Naturopathic process. And so she initially thought of doing the digestive system as a way to learn about that and realized that it’s really the endocrine system that is something that is more relevant to her ultimate goal of becoming a Naturopath. And so her initial idea was to focus on that system, and I initially didn’t want to do system by system because it’s very narrow in terms of the scope of what you learn, but the endocrine system is spread out across a number of body systems. So she approached me and said, “Could I do the endocrine system and coordinate with everybody else in their region to, sort of, do a little highlight. Or you know, some textbooks have a little closer look or a focus on something.” And so hers would sort of – she had these articles spread throughout other peoples’ work saying, “Here is the endocrine system in this region. This is what it does. These are the hormones that are produced. These are what these hormones do. This is what happens when in various disease states.” And so she approached me with this idea of her spreading her information around in other peoples’ work and I just thought that was an amazing idea.
The second idea was a student who – well the one where the student decided to just, sort of, trade aspects of each other’s project to give themselves a little bit of variety and little bit more specific focus on what they were looking for and what they were interested in.
A third one: a student who just wasn’t happy at all with his body region. He couldn’t wrap his head around how he could get enjoyment out of writing an article on this body part. And so I said, “think about ways you might want to do it. Think of something that you might be able to get enjoyment out of outside the box. Just, you know, go and have a think on it.” And after he and I had that conversation I, sort of, thought, “Well maybe you could do this?” And so I approached him with an idea of how he could maybe incorporate a little bit more of his interest and his goals and he seemed very keen on it. And so for that one it was, again, sort of, him providing specific types of information about movement and joint structures and how movement occurs in a number of different regions. So he’s going to have articles posted throughout – or he’s going to have pieces of his work posted throughout other people’s articles with a specific focus on movement and how movement occurs. So it’s run the gamut of students’ bringing their ideas forward and me providing ideas for students as well. 
Interviewer: Excellent. So you said the work that they’re going to be doing is going to be assessed and it’s going to be a part of their grade. I think you said 50%?
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: For the textbook project? And this is the first time you’ll be doing it?
Interviewee: Yeah, it’s brand new.
Interviewer: Do you have plans for it having a life beyond the course? Like would it get used when you do the course again?
Interviewee: I’ve thought about that. I would – my plan is to…because we’re on the WordPress platform, is to once we have it done is to package it to press books and then create an e-book or a pdf that I can then share with all of the students so they can then take it and go on and say, “this is what I have. This is what I did in my Advanced Anatomy class.” So in that respect, yes each student will have it as a legacy project. Going forward into further iterations of the course? I’m not sure how I could go about doing it. I think it would be really nice…I don’t want it to be a one-off project but I also don’t want to do the same project over and over again. 
Interviewer: Yeah. 
Interviewee: So, whether it becomes next years’ students taking the projects that we have and then editing, modifying, adding to making it more robust, filling in gaps. Or whether they take that material and instead of creating – or extending on the articles, maybe they go and make resources for those articles. You know, go through and here’s the article on the face, make PowerPoint slides on that article, make questions, test banks, things like that. So using that as, sort of, the base, expanding out to make new resources that could be make available. Or going back and using that as, sort of, a framework and making it bigger. I’m wrestling around with those ideas and I’m not entirely sure I know how to make it – I don’t want it to be just a one thing that gets redone every year because then it’s…it’s a lot of static and I’d rather it become a living, growing document. 
Interviewer: Cool.
Interviewee: So I’m not sure –
Interviewer: You mentioned – 
Interviewee: –how to go about it. It’s still up in the air. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: And that might be something with the idea of openness in the course going forward, maybe leave that up to the students. I could bring the students in as part of that decision-making process. You know? This is what we have from last year. What do we want to do? Do we want to take those and expand on them? Do we want to start from scratch? Do we want to build these other resources? For me that again, brings a different twist to the openness because it’s not about me, it’s about the students at the end of the day. And I have them – I want to give them a say in what we do and how we do it. 
Interviewer: How’s the experience been so far? Have they introduced the assignment to them? Do they know what they’re up for?
Interviewee: Yup. I introduced the assignment the first day. And I provided them with, sort of, the outline that I have and the rubric. We’ve…look, because of the structure of the course, the first couple of weeks we were spending every time together, so three hours of lecture and two hours of lab, just doing anatomy. So we haven’t spent a huge amount of time on the project yet. The second half of the semester I’m dedicating class time to working on this because it’s a major part of their grade and because it is a major undertaking with a lot of new technologies and a lot of new platforms and a lot of new editing tools that students are going to need to require. The rest of the semester is really going to be workshops where we will spend a class or a lab breaking down images. So we are spending class time building this and the only thing we’ve done so far on it is that, sort of, assigning of regions and negotiating how it’s going to…who’s doing what. But when we come back from Reading Break we’ve got our final exam because we’ve done the anatomy part, and then the rest of the semester’s going to be working on this text book. So…haven’t got a lot of it done. The overwhelming majority of students seem really excited about it. They love the idea that they are in control of what they do – minus the part where they got assigned the piece – but because they had the ability to negotiate and trade, everybody except for one person ended up with something that they were happy with, and that one person is the person who I approached and said, “why don’t you try doing this,” and he’s very keen on doing that. 
So – and I’ve told the students that I’m freaking out about this project because it’s so different from anything I’ve ever done. It’s so big, it’s so encompassing…and along the lines of different kinds of openness, I’m being incredible open with the students, saying, “I don’t know what this is going to look like. I don’t know where this is going to go. I don’t know what it’ll be like at the end.” Hopefully the guidelines that I’ve provided for them will help us stay focused. The assessments that I’ve built in, I’ve worked with a teaching consultant a number of times to build rubrics for both the final project assessment and some peer feedback assessments, so the students get to read and provide feedback to other students, which is part of the grade; and then there is my assessment of the grade; and the students get to self-assess their work using the rubric that’s been provided. 
So I think because the students have a huge amount of control over what they’re doing, they’re really jazzed about it and they’re really looking forward to it. I’ve heard nobody say, “Oh this is going to be dumb,” or anything like that. All of the comments I’ve heard have been really positive and the students are really excited to do it. 
Interviewer: Great. 
Interviewee: But I mean maybe that’s just a sample bias. I don’t know. 
Interviewer: Well once they get in there and working with some of the material, applying it, putting it back together, I think that’s when some of those – it might be worth chatting again. I certainly will follow up with you. And also I think it mentioned it before, but if I can be helpful in any way I’m willing to be available to do that and you’ve got my email that I’m keeping track of. I’m still in town, so if it helps I’m happy to come in and spend an hour or whatever. 
Interviewee: Cool.
Interviewer: That’s open and available.
Interviewee: Thank you. 
Interviewer: The other study I’m doing is with students and it’s not launched yet but it’s sort of getting at, you know, what literacies do they have already that might be things they can use for this kind of work. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: So I’m still formulating that but…
Interviewee: What you are in…like I said, the rest of what we’re doing is workshopping so if you want to pilot anything with my class I’m sure we can arrange something. Although, I’ll have lots of class time available to come in for an hour and just chat with the students, do some informal data collection to help inform your questions. 
Interviewer: That’d be great, yeah. 
Interviewee: I’m open. That’s the theme of this semester of being open. 
Interviewer: Where do you get your inspiration? Is it from the open education movement? Like what you see online happening with open learning? Or is it more with relation to your teaching and how you see your role?
Interviewee: I think it’s more from teaching and where I see my role as an instructor. I’m not all that tuned in to the open resource – the open movement – beyond…my just innate interest in it. I haven’t gone through the Centre here and through working with you in the past, I do know some of the resources, I do know some of that – the importance and the growing impact that open education has. But I haven’t gone out and sought out specific open platforms or resources, it’s mostly from just me wanting to become a better educator and wanting to – and wanting to help the students really find their voice in education. I can’t – I used to think I can’t force a student to learn something, they have to take responsibility for themselves to do that, and I can see the open education that in any sense that you think of open as being a way to help students find that spark, and it’s giving them the awareness that they’re in control of what they do, and I think that, for me, I think that’s where it comes from. 
Interviewer: Yeah. 
Interviewee: Maybe I should rephrase that. The open education is a pathway in which students can become responsible for their own education. And so I’m interested in that respect of how can I get students to get excited about learning and to want to do it for the sake of doing it. Because ultimately that’s what we want. We want students to learn and know how to learn and have fun while they’re learning. Giving them that control, I think, gives it to them. 
Interviewer: And engaging them as creators of knowledge as well is something I’ve seen in the literature and some students might be kind of wary of that: “I’m not sure I can contribute” or “I’m not ready to.” “Just tell me what I need to say,” basically. Have you had any experience with that in your engagement with students?
Interviewee: Um…with the pushback you mean?
Interviewer: Just like they’re – I guess you maybe don’t have it yet because you’re…as you’ve said, you’ve just, sort of, kicked off with this. I’m thinking that’s probably where the second study is going is like “What are students’ perceptions of being engaged in this way?” Because it can be a little different for them too, right?
Interviewee: Yeah. Oh, yeah, totally. I mean, I’m doing TBL in my other course this semester which isn’t necessarily open but it’s a different way of doing it and there’s that pushback from students and we had a – we spent maybe thirty/thirty-five minutes talking about it, having a frank discussion in my class about my rationale for using TBL. I addressed some of the major concerns that students provided to me through a midterm report, their midterm evaluations on the course. And while it’s not necessarily open education in the sense that you might be thinking about it, but again it’s that being open about why I’m making choices in the classroom with students that can be challenging, and you know students: “Can’t you just give me a lecture?” “Can’t you just tell me what I need to know?” You know, that. Those are the comments that you regularly see with TBL and letting the students know that I’m doing this for a reason and providing context as to why it’s happening, addressing their concerns and their fears. I mean, they’re always scared about their marks: “How is this going to affect my grade?” “How is this going to affect my mark?” You know, “you’re affecting my ability to get into physio school. What are you doing?”
But you know, reassuring them that it’s evidence-based, it has the research behind it. If they do – if they put in the effort and the work, it will pay off. And I think yesterday after that discussion and providing them some opportunities to vent was something that I think we moved into a new place and I was able to draw some of the ideas I had talked about weeks ago and went, “What about this, this, and this?” and “Oh yeah, here, here.” “Did you guys just realize what you did? You were talking to me about the material using the material we’ve already covered and you’re saying you need a lecture to do that, and you don’t.” So it was kind of a nice little “a-ha” moment for them and for me saying, “You know you can do this. You know this stuff. You may not feel like you’re learning anything, but applying knowledge from other classes in new situations is really ultimately what we want you to do, and this is just one package.”
So, not being afraid to share with the students. Not being afraid to say, “Well I don’t know where this is going in terms of this project.” Um…I don’t remember what your original question was. 
Interviewer: Oh that – personally you got into another question that I was going to ask. What you’re talking about is very much, for me, how I define open educational practises. It’s not just working with open resources, it’s being open about sharing what you do with your students, with your colleagues, giving flexibility to learning outcomes and teaching strategies. So I think of it in terms of that myriad of assessment and evaluation, teaching and learning strategies. 
Interviewee: Then that’s what I – part of the reason why I got into it is to…is to…let the students know that I’m on the journey with them. And it’s – you know, I’m not that sage on a stage like you traditionally think about when you go to university. I can do that. But I don’t think that could be a sustainable career for – I don’t know if I want to do that for thirty year. Whereas if I’m – if I approach it as, “I’m on this journey with you. Let’s go have fun.” I think it’s going to be every year, every semester’s going to be a new journey, and I get to take it with a whole new group of students. And I think that will a) keep it fresh, and those ideas came out of conversations with people from CIEL and have…yeah I guess it’s shaped how I approach it and if that’s open, then I’m open. 
Interviewer: It’s a tough one because the term and, sort of, you know, people have been doing this sort of stuff for years. It’s not really news. I think what’s kind of new is that there’s technologies that enable us to make it more visible. And also there’s mechanisms to make it reusable in other contexts. So that’s the only thing that’s new for me in open educational practises and I’ve discovered that only in the past six months or so that this is – a lot of people have been doing this for years and there’s only a small, little bit that’s quite different. 
Interviewee: Yeah. A little, tiny change has sort of opened up the new pathways for people to approach it…kind of.
Interviewer: So I wanted to ask you, and you’ve mentioned already some of the facilities you take advantage of, so WordPress is a system that you’re using, the CIEL is a resource that you’ve been drawing on. Are there other facilities – and these could be, you know, space or infrastructure, technology, supports, you’ve mentioned colleagues – that you draw upon to help you with this practise? They may be internal or external. 
Interviewee: Yeah, um…communicating with colleagues a lot is really good. And letting my fellow faculty members in the department know what I’m doing. You know, not to get permission, but to let them know that I’m doing something different and, you know, ensuring they’re – I mean they teach the same students and they see the same students. We have a very, very tight knit community in our little department. And so letting my faculty know that I’m doing that – doing different things – is just respectful in my mind. As far as technologies? WordPress is the site I’m using mainly because it’s accessible for the students and we got throw the hiccups of getting everybody registered over the site over the course of a few weeks. I’ll be using, sort of, open source software for some of the things we’ll be doing. So, we… Rice University, and Open Stacks, there is an open anatomy and physiology textbook that my students have access to and will be using. I’ve got the image banks from the Rice University, so the images are great but they’re fairly limited in their usability. If we have a picture of a bone, every piece is labelled, and it’s cluttered. And they’re line drawings, so I’m playing around with two…Paint.net is an open source image editor, and then there’s an online one called Pixlr that’s does the online – you can open a file there, erase, you know, pixels and then save the file. So that’s something that we’re going to use and I’m going to encourage students to try to use those open sourced ones. Sort of, A) because they can save money, and B) because they’re there and they work and they’re quite good. I wrestled around with the idea of…which one was it…? In terms of file-sharing platforms, I think I’m going to go – try to do everything through VIU Learn, but I’m not sure how easily that’s going to happen. So I’m going to have to play around with maybe a cloud-based file-sharing system so that students can access files. What other technologies do I use…? 
Interviewer: You mentioned Press Books as well. Now, that’s provincially hosted. 
Interviewee: Yeah. I do have access to that through a, sort of, previous failed initiative. But that’s something that I would ultimately use at the end of the term, share that with my students. 
Spaces…class in the lab. We have our skeletons and bones and stuff, so I’m going to encourage students to create their own images for their pages. Whether it’s bones or using their classmates as models and doing surface anatomy. Those types of things we’re going try to do.  
Interviewer: So they’re going to be using their phones or cameras to capture those things?
Interviewee: Yeah. I mean the cell phone cameras are at a place now where you can get some pretty spectacular images off of them. Possibly recording video for movements and things like that would be, you know, cell phones and video cameras if we have access to. But cell phones might just be the easiest way to go about it, now that I think about it. Yeah, I’ll know more once we, sort of, hit road blocks and need to do something and then find a way to do it. I’m just trying – I’m drawing a blank. There are a number of online anatomy websites that would – that we can link to for various things. There are a number of courses on YouTube, crash courses that can help to explain some anatomy. So we’ve got those through our sites. I was able to find a cadaveric dissection series of videos from the University of Wisconsin that is hosted on their website. So I’ve downloaded those images and have shared with my students through VIU Learn, crediting the University of Wisconsin for hosting those. And so, maybe getting stills off of that and having students label those is something that I’ll encourage for muscular, skeletal, and nervous system anatomy. But yeah, once we get to a point where we need to do something, I won’t know I need it until I know I need it. 
Interviewer: The students can be great resources there for finding solutions as well, I find. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: I wanted to ask about how this work, you feel, aligns to the norms of the organization?
Interviewee: VIU in particular?
Interviewer: Well, it could be the Academy, or higher education in general. But VIU, your context, or the wider educational context. 
Interviewee: I think it…the wider – like academia in general I think is slowly starting to view it as a more acceptable practise. Not that it’s unacceptable. But I think that there’s still a lot of the traditional “here’s the textbook, read it,” you know, that kind of mentality in academia in general. I think in BC in particular, I think there’s a strong emphasis on promoting these open pedagogy. How effective it’s being, I don’t know. I think at VIU in particular, it’s fairly accepted and becoming a fairly common practise as new faculty come in and, sort of, the Centre for Innovative and Excellence in Learning, they promote a lot of these practises, they make them available to faculty and support them. Into, sort of, the Faculty of Education, where I’m housed, they’re very, sort of, open. They do a lot of – a lot of their practises in the Faculty of Education in general I would consider open. They do a lot of formative assessments, students have a lot of flexibility in the projects that they do and the assessments that they have. And then in my department, I’m a very active and vocal member with this open pedagogy. There are a number of other people who bring in aspects of it, and I can’t speak to them specifically, but there are people who give students flexibility in projects, in assessments, in timelines and deadlines and things like that. As far as calling themselves open in terms of pedagogy? I don’t know if they would or not. But I see aspects of it in my colleagues. So that’s sort of a – big picture? No. As you get down into individuals you’d say, “Yeah, I see it quite a bit.” 
Interviewer: Yeah, I think I’d agree with you that that’s happening quite a lot. 
Interviewee: Dare I say “grassroots”?
Interviewer: What about our University Mission, Vision? Do you think this sort of work contributes to realizing some of the language in there?
Interviewee: I think it does. I think it does. Being…in the context of being open and sharing the experience with the students, I think it gives them a sense of lifelong – I mean the idea of lifelong learning. The yes I am an educator, it’s my job to teach you all of the things that you need to know, but at the end of the day if I’m learning as we go along it’s embodying what the university wants to provide and through the graduate attributes: lifelong learning, civic engagement, intellectual and practical skills come into play. And I think open pedagogy can facilitate many, many, many of those. And yeah, I think…participating or practising open pedagogy can definitely help the faculty member provide context to the mandate that the university is, sort of, the direction that the university is going through its mandate. Did that make sense? I don’t know. 
Interviewer: Yeah, no, it does. I’m just thinking, like, you’re developing a project that’s going to have students creating knowledge as a textbook, website, or some form. Are there ways you’ll imagine might reach communities that aren’t necessarily on campus? Are there other things it can do? Like engage communities, students who maybe don’t know what anatomy and physiology is all about?
Interviewee: Pie in the sky, yes I hope it does. I hope we can – and I’m going to encourage my students to make this something that is high enough quality that we can share it and promote it as an open resource for anybody. You know, as we’re building it and as we’re making it it’s going to be, sort of, private for us obviously. But at the end of the day, if our student – if I think it’s good enough, I’m going to approach our students and say, “Hey, let’s make this public. Let’s share it with the Centre for Innovation and Excellence in Learning, let them know that it’s there.” Which they do because of conversations I’ve had with people. You know, use it as a model for what our students are doing. You know? Make it a show piece, so to speak, of student engagement and student learning and student…student learning. I guess we’ll just end there. And then showcase it. Show it off. Share it. Spread it around. Make it something that we can be proud of and happy with and provide it to other institutions as a resource. As we go along, build it, expand it, and broaden it out as we need. Sort of make it a legacy project that gets adapted every year as the, you know, “VIU Online Anatomy.” Maybe build it into an open course at some point. I don’t know. 
Interviewer: Great. 
Interviewee: That’s something that I hadn’t thought about before, but…
Interviewer: And the value that this will bring to – you’ve kind of already alluded to it. But can you speak to specifically what you imagine the value could be for…?
Interviewee: For the students? For the university? Like where, which…?
Interviewer: Yeah, maybe you could speak to the stakeholder or the student, the university, and the community. 
Interviewee: Well I mean the students, I think any student who – many of our students wanted to go into – we get three, sort of, areas. Students want to go into either education; they want to go into therapies, rehab, occupational and physical rehab, chiropractors, nursing, things like that, massage therapy; or they just go out and do other. So we’ve got these three, sort of, general groups. You know, having this type of project that a student can walk into an educational program and say, “Here is part of my portfolio, this is something I created and made.” It’s a show piece for them. And again, going into a rehab, a therapy-type program, a grad program, occupational or physical or other, it’s something that they can use to highlight their knowledge, and their ability, and their capacity to communicate in anatomical terms. So in terms of actual value it can be immense for many of those. And the other group who go off and do a whole host of other things, I hope that they would use it as – you know if they were working at as a personal trainer, or as an exercise physiologist, that they would be able to use it as a show piece for, you know, informing clients of various things. If we’ve got former students who own and run yoga studios, you know, incorporating it as part of their – if they have a website for their business, as here’s anatomy information and I created this. And something to be proud of in terms of legacy.
For the institution I think it could be a show piece that VIU can be proud of and highlight as a student driven open learning resource. And I think that…you know, there are a number of those types of things out there, and I don’t see why this can’t be part of that bigger picture in terms of BC education.  
Interviewer: Great. That’s really helpful. So I’ve only got a few more questions left but I’m almost at the hour and I do want to be respectful of your time. 
Interviewee: I’m okay. I’m’ good to go.
Interviewer: Okay. Thanks for that. I appreciate it. It’d be great to get through all of them. But there’s only about three left. So, can you speak to your own teaching philosophy and your beliefs about knowledge and how they relate to your practise here?
Interviewee: Can you say that again? My teaching philosophy, my thoughts on knowledge and how they relate to my practise?
Interviewer: Yeah. 
Interviewee: Like I said before, I want to step away from being the holder of knowledge and be more of a conduit for students to access the knowledge. Through my practise I provide students with, you know, through my first year anatomy course, I give my students complete lecture notes, complete lecture slides, they’ve got access to the open textbook, the publisher’s textbook, I provide them with – I create videos outlining some of the material that’s a little more challenging to students, some of the introductory material, some of the concepts that sort of spread across the course. I make videos for them that they can review and watch regularly. So it’s less of me telling students what is important and more helping them realize the importance of all of it and how to identify pieces that are critical because of how I describe things and how I present them and how I give them. So I give them access to the knowledge in a variety of ways – which, again, is an idea of open pedagogy – and I’m helping them along the process. It’s not me saying, “this is this, this is that, you need to know this, this.” It’s: “Let’s talk about it. Let’s figure out why these things are important and dive into the acquisition of knowledge as a team.” Rather than me saying, “This is what this is. This is what that is.” So I think that’s, sort of, my teaching philosophy has morphed into. You know, trying to get students involved in that process in my third year advanced anatomy class with the major project I think is the farthest I’ve gone to try to do it with them, and again, being open about how freaked out I am about the process, how nervous I am about…about the outcome, because I don’t know how this is going to work. And sharing those feelings I think are giving the students, sort of – letting them know that it’s okay to be freaked out about it and to be scared and to not know what the outcomes are going to be. Because it’s not a paper that’s going to be graded at the end of the day. It’s a document that is beyond their part and we’re doing it as a group. It’s not a group project but it’s not a “me, myself, doing my own thing” either. So it’s – we’re in this together and I think this project is, sort of, the craziest step I’ve taken in this “I’m part of this with you” idea. 
Interviewer: Some faculty may be turned off from the whole idea because it is uncharted and, you know, you’re brave to go at this. What could be – this is not even on my set of questions, but I’m just curious – are there ways – do we need to – do we need examples of how this plays out and how it can work? Do we need better tools to make it easier to facilitate? Or how do you think this…?
Interviewee: I think the tools are there. I think we need…I think – and I hope this project will sort of be proof of concept – and I mean I know there are other examples of this type of – 
Interviewer: Learning design? It’s kind of a design.
Interviewee: Part of this came from that non-disposable assignment. Right? You get these documents that live on after the course, things that students are proud of. That’s where the idea for this really stemmed from. And I think as more and more of these things are being developed and we can use them as a proof of concept. You know, yes, we did this thing and it worked out really well. It can make it less scary for other people to do it. And it can be an exemplar of what to do, or maybe what not to do. Because if things go off the rails, you know, you don’t want someone else to go off the rails too. So maybe that’s another big part of what this legacy could – what this could be is that showcase of “this is what we did, this is how we did it, it was bumpy, and it was messy, and at the end of the day we’re really proud of it, and here’s how you can do it too.” So yeah, I think that’s…I think that’s what’s needed is showing people yeah, this can be done. And I don’t know if educators do that enough. I mean, there’s lots of opportunities to communicate with people from your department, but from faculty to faculty the opportunities are there, they’re often times not specific for this – the types of work you’re doing in your classroom. I’ve been very active in the council where there’s lots of different departments and different faculties that work together, but a lot of the things you do in your classroom don’t often come up and you don’t get a chance to, sort of, brag about them as much as we maybe should and maybe can and let people know that cool stuff is happening. Because I’m sure there are people who know wicked stuff that I don’t know about. 
Interviewer: I agree. Yeah, I think that’s another – sort of, point of the open education movement is to share our practise and how we’re teaching. Right? So yeah, I think that’s a really good point. 
When do you have the students until?
Interviewee: April. 
Interviewer: April end? April start?
Interviewee: April I think the last day of classes is on the 16th. 
Interviewer: Okay, because yeah it would be interesting to capture some of their thoughts on this at that time. So I might follow up with you on that. That might be a separate study in itself and I’d be willing to do much of the leg work on getting – 
Interviewee: I’ll send you my schedule. 
Interviewer: Okay.
Interviewee: My classes are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. I’ve got labs on Tuesday. So it’s two smaller groups. 
Interviewer: How many students in total?
Interviewee: Hmm?
Interviewer: How many students in total?
Interviewee: Thirty-four. So my lectures are thirty-four and then my labs are two groups of seventeen. 
Interviewer: Okay. Yeah, I’ll follow up separately on that. It sounds really interesting and it’s happening right now so it’s exciting to – 
Interviewee: Yeah. It’s, sort of, like you’ll be live capturing the action as it’s happening. Like I said, if you’re in the works for doing another project, this could be a perfect way to pilot some of your questions and get a little better handle on how you might want to approach it. It’s a really good group of students who know – I mean they’re living this open process so I think they’d be more than willing to chat and communicate about their experiences with it. 
Interviewer: Awesome. That sounds exciting.
Okay, so I’m just about done. The last question is more of a question for you if you have questions of me, or if you – if there’s things that we didn’t get to that you thought would have come up, or other things on your mind that you want to mention?
Interviewee: Um…no I don’t think so. We covered a lot of stuff. If anything does come up, I’ll send you a message and let you know. 
Interviewer: Yeah.
Interviewee: Um…yeah, I don’t think I have much. You did say that you were talking about, sort of, making the transcript and stuff available. What sort of…comments have you heard from other people about that? Like other interviews you’ve done or other faculty or your supervisor. Like, what’s their – what are people – because it’s something that’s typically…I mean I had a – my background was science and so raw data is sometimes published alongside of the finished paper, but you don’t often hear about it in sort of – 
Interviewer: Social science research? 
Interviewee: Qualitative research. 
Interviewer: It’s true. It’s true. It was recommended by my committee that I consider it because I was going to be interviewing people with, sort of, an open mindset that they might say, “Oh that’s a great idea, yes we support –”
Interviewee: Oh, I do think it’s a great idea. 
Interviewer: Yeah, but at the same time it’s like a very specific conversation we’re having, so for someone else to interpret, and we’re using acronyms and we’re using context – contextual language, it can be hard to parse out and it’s a lot of work to make anonymous. So I’ve set myself up for that, too. So if people say, “Yes, you can release it but I want to be anonymous,” I need to remove all references to institutions, to place, to everything. So I’ve let people decide at the stage where I provide them the transcript. Maybe they look at it and are like, “well, no I’m happy to contribute to this study but I don’t think it would be very useful beyond this.” And that’s fine. But I just wanted to have that as an option. And it’s also kind of an experiment in itself because I’m also curious. I don’t know if I was the interviewee, I would be wondering about that. I’d say, “I probably want to have a good look at that transcript before I just put it out there.” 
Interviewee: Hmm. Yeah. 
Interviewer: But yeah, my supervisor – my former supervisor in South Africa, she did a huge study, like a global study basically and they released all of their data and many of them were interviews. So, she’s a resource too on how to do that. But she said it’s a lot of work. 
Interviewee: I would imagine. I would imagine. Especially if it needs to be anonymized.
Interviewer: Yeah, I mean we’ve got the audio transcript as well. Like, you can have any of these artifacts that we’ve created if you wish. The video will be there but I plan to delete it and just use the audio, but if you wanted it you’d be welcome to it as well. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: Yeah, and as you may have – may know, I’m doing this study with not just VIU people, but people from UBC, SFU, UVic, and Royal Roads, so I’m trying to get a broad spectrum of what’s going on in the province. So your voice is really appreciated. 
Interviewee: Are you going to be staying specifically in BC? Or are you going to try to – are you interested in going more nationally or even further?
Interviewer: I do want to finish the PhD, so I’m going to stay in the province. There’s enough going on in the province, like there’s – 
Interviewee: I was going to say, there’s probably…a lot of the – I mean I live here and I’m working here, so I probably have been exposed to it a little bit more, but BC does seem to be on the front edge of this. 
Interviewer: Well they’ve got the provincial investment, and so part of this is to get beyond the idea that open is just about textbooks, for me it’s really more about some of the things that you’ve talked about like how we teach and what we teach and how that can be meaningful for students. So while I think open textbooks are hugely important, I think there’s also this area that’s kind of under researched. So I really appreciate you sharing your story. 
Interviewee: Yeah. I just thought maybe if you are open to it, I can share your contact with a few people in my department. We’ve got some faculty who have been around for thirty plus years in the department, and we’ve got another faculty member who’s year one. So it might be interesting to get those types of perspectives. If you’re interested I can share those emails. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’ve got a few lined up. So if you would just let me – or just sit on that for now. 
Interviewee: Oh yeah, for sure. 
Interviewer: If I need additional…I’ve got to contain this thing as well. Like I could just go, “let’s go, let’s do…” so I have to kind of keep it contained. Also because I’m doing that second study. I’m not – this isn’t, like, a one massive dissertation thesis, it’s a series of. 
Interviewee: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, certainly one of the ideas of the open data, and like the questions I ask, I’m going to make openly available. Things like this, so people can take it and do it in Alberta, or do it in another context, or take a different lens. So I’ll try to make that as accessible to other researchers. Or maybe it’s something I take on after I graduate as additional work. 
Interviewee: Yeah. Cool.
Interviewer: Okay, I really want to thank you again. 
Interviewee: You’re welcome. 
Interviewer:  I don’t know if you saw, but in the consent form I offered a twenty dollar gift card for chapters, so that will be coming at you shortly. 
Interviewee: Sweet!
Interviewer: Later today or tomorrow. 
Interviewee: Yeah, awesome. I’ll buy my kids a book. 
Interviewer: Yeah. Thanks again and I’m going to do some thinking about your group and if I can get ethics through as quickly as I would need to.
Interviewee: Do you need ethics for a pilot?
Interviewer: I would want to make it something that we can use and share a little more widely. As you said, that’s what is kind of needed. Like, people need examples of how this works and cases where you get some feedback.  
Interviewee: Yeah. Okay, yeah, we’re together until the end of April, or until mid-April. I’ll send you my – the schedule for the class. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: And…yeah. If anything works, just let me know. Like I said, the rest of the semester is going to be spent working on this project so you wouldn’t be interfering with any lecture time because I don’t do any lectures. 
Interviewer: Okay. Thanks again, and it looks like the snow is just starting here. 
Interviewee: Yeah, my windows are closed so I can’t see, but there’s fluffy stuff in the air. 
Interviewer:  Thanks again, and have a great weekend. 
Interviewee: You too, man. Good seeing you!	
Interviewer:  Likewise.


Interview 003 Mar 2, 2018 
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewer: Okay, so I forwarded you the consent form as well, hopefully you’ve had a chance to review it. Are there any questions about that?
Interviewee: No, it was just fine. 
Interviewer: And since I won’t have an opportunity to get that back from you, can I get your verbal consent on the recording that’s started now.
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: Thanks very much. I don’t know if you noticed on the consent form, there were a couple options for having open data as part of the study and basically what that means is if you wanted to you could make your transcript that I’ll be creating a piece of open data that other researchers might investigate. I don’t need you to make that decision now, I’ll provide you with the transcript and you can consider it at that time. 
Interviewee: Okay. Yeah, that’s great. 
[Personal information redacted for privacy]
Interviewer: I use the term ‘Open Educational Practises” in the consent form and to frame the study. Does that term have any meaning to you?
Interviewee: Yeah. I think when I consider open education, I sort of see it aligned with other open movements. So, the open source movement, the open data movement, the open access movement. Also, for me “open” usually means moving beyond the classroom, both in terms potentially of audience, so not just students but also community members or alternative academic specialists. As well as moving the scope of learning beyond the classroom in a way that people can create some research that has a broader reach. So whether that is an online portfolio or something that’s disseminated more widely, or creating something that’s online that’s openly accessible. 
And also that the open education movement sort of blurs the boundaries between instructor and student to create a more collaborative space. So a lot of these times, for me it means open education includes creation and that’s a way for students to, kind of, become a leader in their own learning. Instead of just regurgitating information, they’re rather more exploring and creating. And sort of forging their own path. 
Interviewer: Excellent. Okay. 
How long have you been engaging with this?
Interviewee: Oh, gosh. I started…when I was a Master’s student one of my collaborators on this project was an instructor for the first semester of my graduate student courses and one thing that we did as a final culminating assignment was create open editions of Romantic era literary texts. 
Interviewer: Oh, cool. 
Interviewee: So, I built my first edition on WordPress and it was open, it was forward facing, so at that point I was, sort of, a student of this more open education practise or some sort of collaborative learning initiative. And it peaked my interest mostly because it, kind of, moved away from the idea of University being this siloed learning institution and, sort of, brought it into conversation with other scholars and with community members and enthusiasts.
And so that, sort of, sparked my interest and then I kept building the digital edition on my own and it ended up being the culminating project of my Master’s degree and as I moved into my PhD I continued to expand it. And that is when I, sort of, I participated in a course where we, sort of, redesigned an Undergraduate course to incorporate this sort of digital edition design. 
Interviewer: So another thread of my research is the student perspective of being engaged in this way. I’m doing a three paper thesis. So the third paper is going to be with students. I wonder if you could just share how as a student when you were engaged in that way, was it unfamiliar, or just what was your experience when first asked to maybe do some of your work in a more open way?
Interviewee: I think it was definitely unfamiliar and a bit daunting, both in terms of not having, maybe, the technical expertise that I needed in order to present my work online, working with websites and coding, and those sorts of things. But also in terms of creating something that was for an audience beyond my professor. And so my undergraduate degree in the humanities most of the assignments that I completed were written assignments that were handed in to either the professor or the maker for that course and then graded and handed back to me. And moving into creating something that was going to be online and open meant that it was going to be evaluated by my instructor but also accessible to my peers, and to people in the outside community. So I think it was definitely daunting and I know when I have, sort of, coached people along in creating something like this that is a very similar feeling across the board that people are, sort of, nervous of moving outside. However, I’ve found it incredibly rewarding and I felt a definite sense of ownership of what I made that was different than producing just a written document that was handed in and graded. 
Interviewer: Mhm. Excellent. I really appreciate you sharing that. It wasn’t really as part of the interview but certainly something that will be helpful when I approach that study with students. 
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: So I really appreciate that. 
Can you tell me about how you engaged with open education as part of your teaching? How did you – perhaps with your collaborators design teaching that drove from the open movement?
Interviewee: Sure. So the deepest experience that I had with it was being, what we sort of termed “peer coaches,” myself and the other PhD student worked alongside the instructor in her upper division graduate course to, sort of, coach students through building these digital forward facing projects. So I was not the lead instructor on the course but I had worked with the instructor before and I had been a student myself working in similar sorts of practises. And she was open to us kind of come along side and help design a course that was going to be more effective in teaching students with skills that they need to create these forward facing projects. And so a couple of things that we did is we looked at the technical side of things. When I was – there was a huge learning curve when it came to, sort of, formulating how I was going to encode a website, make it user-friendly, and launch it into the universe. And so my colleague and I worked a lot on teaching students, sort of, how to manipulate WordPress to create a digital edition. We also came in – my colleague and I – and taught a seminar on edition design. So, how students could think about the argument that they’re trying to present to their audience and how they could create a website that was able to assist in making that argument effectively. 
And then, sort of, throughout the course of the semester my colleague and I walked alongside the students and were a point of contact for them when they have questions whether they had very specific things like “I can’t get X or Y to work,” and “how do I fix that?” Or if it was more open and theoretical things which was, “How do I think about my audience? How do I present this argument? What sort of resources are going to be effective in me linking to my own research?” And then at the end of the course we distributed an evaluation to have them sort of speak back to us on what worked, what was effective in the course, what was rewarding about creating something that was open and online and accessible and what were some of the things that were challenging about doing that instead of the more traditional humanities assessment on your written paper.
Interviewer: Are you able to share any of that feedback, perhaps?
Interviewee: Yeah, I can. Let me just pull up the document. 
Interviewer: Or just more generally the sentiment. 
Interviewee: I think that a lot of people were at first a little bit worried about the digital component and the fact that we’d be creating something open because they had not necessarily received training on that beforehand. But most people left the course feeling like their technical skills had been enhanced and that they sort of had this sense of ownership over what they had created because it was truly theirs and it was sitting out there in the world and they could show their family and their friends and they could present it to a potential employer as a portfolio of what they had created both content and also technical specification. 
Interviewer: Yea, I’m often curious how much the technical barriers get in the way. You know, I think there’s value in doing this in a number of different disciplines just based on the core principles of just, sort of, peer review, and collaboration and as you say, building things that have a life outside the classroom. What was your experience like? Did the technical issues get significantly in the way of learning what they were there to do? Which was probably – it was an English course? Or a writing course?
Interviewee: I think that the myth of digital natives was something that we definitely had to overcome. It was something that the instructor notes that she hadn’t really thought of in previous iterations of the course and both my colleague and I, sort of, felt as students of those previous iterations that there was this, sort of, false assumption that the students understood how to do all of these things. And when you buy into that myth, that digital native that already know how to manipulate this technology, it can become a barrier. But if you’re able to debunk that and work actively to teach those skills, I think that working with out of the box tools like WordPress, or I know people who have done similar projects in Omeka or Drupal. It’s not nearly as big a barrier as it seems. While possibly it, sort of, looks from the outset that learning the technical skills is very separate from the critical thinking and writing skills that you might learn in a traditional course, they actually overlap in a significant amount. If you’re thinking about design, which is sort of more of a technical side: “how am I going to lay out the pages of this digital edition site. How am I going to greet my audience where they’re going to go?” That actually ends up playing directly into the argument that someone is trying to make the same way that organization of paragraphs and the paper play into the thesis statement of that essay. 
So there’s a significant amount of overlap and I think that if the instructor or instructors can take the time to, sort of, build in the technical aspects to the training of the course that it can actually be productive for both learning a skill set online but also for honing in critical thinking and argumentative skills. 
Interviewer: Yeah and it seems the tools are getting much easier to work with. I agree with you about that digital native myth. I think while there’s certainly – it’s certainly true that students are maybe exposed to technology much more than previous generations, I don’t think they necessarily understand the mechanics of how those things work. We shouldn’t take that for granted as a literacy. 
Interviewee: Yeah and one thing that we did in our collaborative project is that we created tutorial videos that walked people through these things. Because I do think that, like you said, students are generally exposed to technologies at a really young age so they’re able to follow instructions quite easily because they understand the general layout and mechanisms of working online. But specific tools, or manipulating tools for a specific purpose, is not quite as intuitive. So if you can create something as simple as just a three minute tutorial that says, “This is how you create X, Y, or Z,” they’re usually able to follow those quite easily and that brings the anxiety around working in a platform that’s unknown to them way, way down because all of a sudden they have a guide and they’re used to following, sort of, an online guide. 
Interviewer: So I think you identified the catalyst for your interest in this area as being your own engagement as a student?
Interviewee: Ah-huh.
Interviewer: Were there other aspects that, sort of, brought you into this space as a practitioner?
Interviewee: I think that I came in as a student and I found it productive for myself and that sort of brought me into the movement. But students being a part of something that was an open access academic work, I feel like it aligns so closely with the ethos that I have as a teacher and as a researcher. The idea that the university should be part of a community and that the work that we do as researchers should be beneficial for people outside of the university and working in an open practise is something that I hold very dear because I think that it helps link researchers with community members and fosters those types of partnerships that are mutually beneficial. 
Interviewer: You also mentioned things like open access, open data. As an English major, or as an English practitioner, were there other aspects of those that influenced you as well?
Interviewee: Um…I’m not nearly as familiar with open source or open data because I haven’t worked with anything quite so technical yet. But open access is something that I think about quite often and was very important to me when I was creating my own work online. Whether it be this collaborative project that I worked on with my colleague and the instructor where we created a site that is open access and that we presented at conferences as such and welcomed people to correspond with us about it, send feedback, sort of have it be a point of connection instead of something that just stays static.  
And when I created my own digital edition as well that’s been important to me that it be open to my colleagues but also to community members to let it be an iterative living document that responds to comments, feedback, criticism from other people in my field to make it something that’s always evolving and improving and I think that’s one of the benefits of working in an open platform is there might be – the highways of communication might be a little bit more open, both in terms of how much feedback but also in terms of who was accessing the information, and who can provide that feedback. 
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned open editions a couple of times. Can you just tell me exactly what that means?
Interviewee: Yeah. So it’s working with literature. There are print, scholarly editions of most of the poetry, novels, texts that we read. And so a digital edition is instead of presenting this in print where it might include an introduction, annotated text, and some appendices that help to contextualize the literary work, it’s presented online. And generally it will include the same type of materials: scholarly introductions, annotations, contextual materials, but there’s also the opportunity working in the digital medium to include multimedia to make it a little bit less linear of a product where you’re working from beginning to end and have it be more of an exploratory site. 
Interviewer: Okay. Just curious, have you also tapped into, sort of, the open access texts that are now beyond copyright? I think Gutenberg would be an example of some of the resources that are now freely available and out of copyright?  
Interviewee: Sure. Yes. So I have used project Gutenberg for myself, and Google Books in a very similar way because the texts that I work on are – they are old enough that they are generally out of copyright. So I’ve participated in that as a scholar and a researcher and I’ve benefited from the access to those texts, for sure. 
Interviewer: Right…and how do you feel these sorts of practises align to the institutional norms? Common practises, protocols, and etiquette. You have mentioned this already I think in terms of how it serves the university’s vision. Do you have any other thoughts on how this is aligned with other norms of the institution?
Interviewee: Sure. I mean, I think generally – at least when I was an undergraduate student in an English department – that creating open resources was not something that I did as a student, but I do think that it’s becoming a more normal practise so that people are sort of experimenting with things in the classroom. So I think that the idea of open education or at least sort of digital creation is becoming more accepted, I’m sure it differs across departments and disciplines and I can only sort of speak about my tiny little experience in a few English departments. But I do think that this idea of having students create something online that is open is cropping up more in courses now that I’m serving as a graduate student than I had in my own experience as an undergraduate student in the same discipline. 
Interviewer: And do you have any, sort of, ideas of why it’s happening now? Is it just that technology’s breaking the barriers down? Or is it that we – well maybe I’ll just open it for you. Do you have any thoughts of why this is happening now?
Interviewee: I do think that technology has something to do with it. I also just think that the open movements are becoming a more common ethos or practise in institutions. Though all of the open movements are certainly nothing very new, I think that them being built into whether it be the mandate of the university or the, sort of, teaching philosophy of individual departments or individual instructors, that it’s becoming much more of a social norm. And so I think that that allows instructors to feel like they can experiment with these sorts of things. And that is the case, is that it is often an experiment and sometimes experiments don’t turn out particularly well. So if the instructors feel like they have the support of the department or their institution to kind of put forth a course like this but does something a little bit different I think is something that is sort of a wave that’s coming through now. Sort of allowing people to do that. 
Interviewer: And how do you feel the value – what value for the student? Is the question. 
Interviewee: Sorry? What was the question? 
Interviewer: What’s the value for the student in being engaged this way? I know you’ve also hinted at it already. 
Interviewee: I think there’s a number of things. I think firstly…the stakes might feel higher when someone is creating something that’s going to be open and accessible by a wider community. And I think that success in creating that type of resource or project results in a deeper sense of ownership and accomplishment over the work. So I think that creating this resource that exists out in the world is something that students maybe don’t expect that they’ll feel particularly fond of, but once they do that and they see people using it, there’s a deep sense of accomplishment there. 
I think as well it helps to create, at least in terms of these online projects, something that they can take to an employer to evidence specific skills that they’ve gained, or use as a writing sample. 
Interviewer: Right. 
Interviewee: And show that they’re engaging with a wider community beyond just the classroom which I think can be particularly useful for job interviews and those sorts of things. And I know even for myself, moving to higher education out of my undergraduate degree that I was able to use my digital edition as a sort of a research portfolio to present to institutions to say, “These are some of the things that I have done.”
Interviewer: How does this all relate to your own teaching philosophy?	
Interviewee: Um…I think that one of the other things that open education does is flip the hierarchies of the classroom which is something that is important to my own teaching philosophy. The idea of collaboration versus sort of this instructor-student relationship. Fostering students’ sense of curiosity in exploration as they kind of work to create their own projects or narratives and present them to an audience through their own sense of agency and sort of being a facilitator for those things instead of just where it’s a relationship of some sort of information regurgitation. I think that this can be done in many different ways to foster that idea of curiosity and exploration and creation in the classroom, but I think that the open movement is really helpful in making those values deep and intrinsic to a classroom because you are involving a broader audience. So I think that it facilitates that almost naturally that the instructor and the students become, sort of, collaborators on something that they’re presenting outside instead of it just being the student presenting something just to the instructor. 
Interviewer: Right. 
Okay well I think that pretty much covers all of the prompts I wanted to provide. Is there anything else that you want to mention or that I didn’t ask that you thought I would?
Interviewee: No, I think that that’s pretty much what I was expecting. 
Interviewer: And no further questions?
Interviewee: I don’t have any further questions now. 
Interviewer: Okay. Well I want to really thank you for your time, and I’m again sorry that we had some technical blips at the beginning and thanks for persevering. 
Interviewee: These things happen. 
Interviewer: Go ahead. 
Interviewee: Oh, I was just going to say that it’s just funny because I feel like a lot of what I was talking about was being able to figure out the technology and yet, there still are times when we can’t! 
Interviewer: Well you know, one of my design philosophies is to always have a Plan B, and had I been relying on that environment for the recording and didn’t have my trusty desktop recorder, I would have been in a bad space. 
Interviewee: Oh, yes. We can never fully trust these things. Sometimes we’re able to wrangle them, but other times they’re just prove insurmountable.
Interviewer: If anything else comes to mind, don’t hesitate to contact me. You will get an offer for a $20 gift card at Chapters for being part of the interview, so I hope you’ll enjoy that. And if you, as I said, think of anything else or want to engage further, don’t hesitate to reach out. 
Interviewee: Sure. Thank you very much. 
Interviewer: Well thank you and I wish you a good weekend!
Interviewee: Yes, you too!


Interview 003 Mar 2, 2018 
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewer: Okay, so I forwarded you the consent form as well, hopefully you’ve had a chance to review it. Are there any questions about that?
Interviewee: No, it was just fine. 
Interviewer: And since I won’t have an opportunity to get that back from you, can I get your verbal consent on the recording that’s started now.
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: Thanks very much. I don’t know if you noticed on the consent form, there were a couple options for having open data as part of the study and basically what that means is if you wanted to you could make your transcript that I’ll be creating a piece of open data that other researchers might investigate. I don’t need you to make that decision now, I’ll provide you with the transcript and you can consider it at that time. 
Interviewee: Okay. Yeah, that’s great. 
[Personal information redacted for privacy]
Interviewer: I use the term ‘Open Educational Practises” in the consent form and to frame the study. Does that term have any meaning to you?
Interviewee: Yeah. I think when I consider open education, I sort of see it aligned with other open movements. So, the open source movement, the open data movement, the open access movement. Also, for me “open” usually means moving beyond the classroom, both in terms potentially of audience, so not just students but also community members or alternative academic specialists. As well as moving the scope of learning beyond the classroom in a way that people can create some research that has a broader reach. So whether that is an online portfolio or something that’s disseminated more widely, or creating something that’s online that’s openly accessible. 
And also that the open education movement sort of blurs the boundaries between instructor and student to create a more collaborative space. So a lot of these times, for me it means open education includes creation and that’s a way for students to, kind of, become a leader in their own learning. Instead of just regurgitating information, they’re rather more exploring and creating. And sort of forging their own path. 
Interviewer: Excellent. Okay. 
How long have you been engaging with this?
Interviewee: Oh, gosh. I started…when I was a Master’s student one of my collaborators on this project was an instructor for the first semester of my graduate student courses and one thing that we did as a final culminating assignment was create open editions of Romantic era literary texts. 
Interviewer: Oh, cool. 
Interviewee: So, I built my first edition on WordPress and it was open, it was forward facing, so at that point I was, sort of, a student of this more open education practise or some sort of collaborative learning initiative. And it peaked my interest mostly because it, kind of, moved away from the idea of University being this siloed learning institution and, sort of, brought it into conversation with other scholars and with community members and enthusiasts.
And so that, sort of, sparked my interest and then I kept building the digital edition on my own and it ended up being the culminating project of my Master’s degree and as I moved into my PhD I continued to expand it. And that is when I, sort of, I participated in a course where we, sort of, redesigned an Undergraduate course to incorporate this sort of digital edition design. 
Interviewer: So another thread of my research is the student perspective of being engaged in this way. I’m doing a three paper thesis. So the third paper is going to be with students. I wonder if you could just share how as a student when you were engaged in that way, was it unfamiliar, or just what was your experience when first asked to maybe do some of your work in a more open way?
Interviewee: I think it was definitely unfamiliar and a bit daunting, both in terms of not having, maybe, the technical expertise that I needed in order to present my work online, working with websites and coding, and those sorts of things. But also in terms of creating something that was for an audience beyond my professor. And so my undergraduate degree in the humanities most of the assignments that I completed were written assignments that were handed in to either the professor or the maker for that course and then graded and handed back to me. And moving into creating something that was going to be online and open meant that it was going to be evaluated by my instructor but also accessible to my peers, and to people in the outside community. So I think it was definitely daunting and I know when I have, sort of, coached people along in creating something like this that is a very similar feeling across the board that people are, sort of, nervous of moving outside. However, I’ve found it incredibly rewarding and I felt a definite sense of ownership of what I made that was different than producing just a written document that was handed in and graded. 
Interviewer: Mhm. Excellent. I really appreciate you sharing that. It wasn’t really as part of the interview but certainly something that will be helpful when I approach that study with students. 
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: So I really appreciate that. 
Can you tell me about how you engaged with open education as part of your teaching? How did you – perhaps with your collaborators design teaching that drove from the open movement?
Interviewee: Sure. So the deepest experience that I had with it was being, what we sort of termed “peer coaches,” myself and the other PhD student worked alongside the instructor in her upper division graduate course to, sort of, coach students through building these digital forward facing projects. So I was not the lead instructor on the course but I had worked with the instructor before and I had been a student myself working in similar sorts of practises. And she was open to us kind of come along side and help design a course that was going to be more effective in teaching students with skills that they need to create these forward facing projects. And so a couple of things that we did is we looked at the technical side of things. When I was – there was a huge learning curve when it came to, sort of, formulating how I was going to encode a website, make it user-friendly, and launch it into the universe. And so my colleague and I worked a lot on teaching students, sort of, how to manipulate WordPress to create a digital edition. We also came in – my colleague and I – and taught a seminar on edition design. So, how students could think about the argument that they’re trying to present to their audience and how they could create a website that was able to assist in making that argument effectively. 
And then, sort of, throughout the course of the semester my colleague and I walked alongside the students and were a point of contact for them when they have questions whether they had very specific things like “I can’t get X or Y to work,” and “how do I fix that?” Or if it was more open and theoretical things which was, “How do I think about my audience? How do I present this argument? What sort of resources are going to be effective in me linking to my own research?” And then at the end of the course we distributed an evaluation to have them sort of speak back to us on what worked, what was effective in the course, what was rewarding about creating something that was open and online and accessible and what were some of the things that were challenging about doing that instead of the more traditional humanities assessment on your written paper.
Interviewer: Are you able to share any of that feedback, perhaps?
Interviewee: Yeah, I can. Let me just pull up the document. 
Interviewer: Or just more generally the sentiment. 
Interviewee: I think that a lot of people were at first a little bit worried about the digital component and the fact that we’d be creating something open because they had not necessarily received training on that beforehand. But most people left the course feeling like their technical skills had been enhanced and that they sort of had this sense of ownership over what they had created because it was truly theirs and it was sitting out there in the world and they could show their family and their friends and they could present it to a potential employer as a portfolio of what they had created both content and also technical specification. 
Interviewer: Yea, I’m often curious how much the technical barriers get in the way. You know, I think there’s value in doing this in a number of different disciplines just based on the core principles of just, sort of, peer review, and collaboration and as you say, building things that have a life outside the classroom. What was your experience like? Did the technical issues get significantly in the way of learning what they were there to do? Which was probably – it was an English course? Or a writing course?
Interviewee: I think that the myth of digital natives was something that we definitely had to overcome. It was something that the instructor notes that she hadn’t really thought of in previous iterations of the course and both my colleague and I, sort of, felt as students of those previous iterations that there was this, sort of, false assumption that the students understood how to do all of these things. And when you buy into that myth, that digital native that already know how to manipulate this technology, it can become a barrier. But if you’re able to debunk that and work actively to teach those skills, I think that working with out of the box tools like WordPress, or I know people who have done similar projects in Omeka or Drupal. It’s not nearly as big a barrier as it seems. While possibly it, sort of, looks from the outset that learning the technical skills is very separate from the critical thinking and writing skills that you might learn in a traditional course, they actually overlap in a significant amount. If you’re thinking about design, which is sort of more of a technical side: “how am I going to lay out the pages of this digital edition site. How am I going to greet my audience where they’re going to go?” That actually ends up playing directly into the argument that someone is trying to make the same way that organization of paragraphs and the paper play into the thesis statement of that essay. 
So there’s a significant amount of overlap and I think that if the instructor or instructors can take the time to, sort of, build in the technical aspects to the training of the course that it can actually be productive for both learning a skill set online but also for honing in critical thinking and argumentative skills. 
Interviewer: Yeah and it seems the tools are getting much easier to work with. I agree with you about that digital native myth. I think while there’s certainly – it’s certainly true that students are maybe exposed to technology much more than previous generations, I don’t think they necessarily understand the mechanics of how those things work. We shouldn’t take that for granted as a literacy. 
Interviewee: Yeah and one thing that we did in our collaborative project is that we created tutorial videos that walked people through these things. Because I do think that, like you said, students are generally exposed to technologies at a really young age so they’re able to follow instructions quite easily because they understand the general layout and mechanisms of working online. But specific tools, or manipulating tools for a specific purpose, is not quite as intuitive. So if you can create something as simple as just a three minute tutorial that says, “This is how you create X, Y, or Z,” they’re usually able to follow those quite easily and that brings the anxiety around working in a platform that’s unknown to them way, way down because all of a sudden they have a guide and they’re used to following, sort of, an online guide. 
Interviewer: So I think you identified the catalyst for your interest in this area as being your own engagement as a student?
Interviewee: Ah-huh.
Interviewer: Were there other aspects that, sort of, brought you into this space as a practitioner?
Interviewee: I think that I came in as a student and I found it productive for myself and that sort of brought me into the movement. But students being a part of something that was an open access academic work, I feel like it aligns so closely with the ethos that I have as a teacher and as a researcher. The idea that the university should be part of a community and that the work that we do as researchers should be beneficial for people outside of the university and working in an open practise is something that I hold very dear because I think that it helps link researchers with community members and fosters those types of partnerships that are mutually beneficial. 
Interviewer: You also mentioned things like open access, open data. As an English major, or as an English practitioner, were there other aspects of those that influenced you as well?
Interviewee: Um…I’m not nearly as familiar with open source or open data because I haven’t worked with anything quite so technical yet. But open access is something that I think about quite often and was very important to me when I was creating my own work online. Whether it be this collaborative project that I worked on with my colleague and the instructor where we created a site that is open access and that we presented at conferences as such and welcomed people to correspond with us about it, send feedback, sort of have it be a point of connection instead of something that just stays static.  
And when I created my own digital edition as well that’s been important to me that it be open to my colleagues but also to community members to let it be an iterative living document that responds to comments, feedback, criticism from other people in my field to make it something that’s always evolving and improving and I think that’s one of the benefits of working in an open platform is there might be – the highways of communication might be a little bit more open, both in terms of how much feedback but also in terms of who was accessing the information, and who can provide that feedback. 
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned open editions a couple of times. Can you just tell me exactly what that means?
Interviewee: Yeah. So it’s working with literature. There are print, scholarly editions of most of the poetry, novels, texts that we read. And so a digital edition is instead of presenting this in print where it might include an introduction, annotated text, and some appendices that help to contextualize the literary work, it’s presented online. And generally it will include the same type of materials: scholarly introductions, annotations, contextual materials, but there’s also the opportunity working in the digital medium to include multimedia to make it a little bit less linear of a product where you’re working from beginning to end and have it be more of an exploratory site. 
Interviewer: Okay. Just curious, have you also tapped into, sort of, the open access texts that are now beyond copyright? I think Gutenberg would be an example of some of the resources that are now freely available and out of copyright?  
Interviewee: Sure. Yes. So I have used project Gutenberg for myself, and Google Books in a very similar way because the texts that I work on are – they are old enough that they are generally out of copyright. So I’ve participated in that as a scholar and a researcher and I’ve benefited from the access to those texts, for sure. 
Interviewer: Right…and how do you feel these sorts of practises align to the institutional norms? Common practises, protocols, and etiquette. You have mentioned this already I think in terms of how it serves the university’s vision. Do you have any other thoughts on how this is aligned with other norms of the institution?
Interviewee: Sure. I mean, I think generally – at least when I was an undergraduate student in an English department – that creating open resources was not something that I did as a student, but I do think that it’s becoming a more normal practise so that people are sort of experimenting with things in the classroom. So I think that the idea of open education or at least sort of digital creation is becoming more accepted, I’m sure it differs across departments and disciplines and I can only sort of speak about my tiny little experience in a few English departments. But I do think that this idea of having students create something online that is open is cropping up more in courses now that I’m serving as a graduate student than I had in my own experience as an undergraduate student in the same discipline. 
Interviewer: And do you have any, sort of, ideas of why it’s happening now? Is it just that technology’s breaking the barriers down? Or is it that we – well maybe I’ll just open it for you. Do you have any thoughts of why this is happening now?
Interviewee: I do think that technology has something to do with it. I also just think that the open movements are becoming a more common ethos or practise in institutions. Though all of the open movements are certainly nothing very new, I think that them being built into whether it be the mandate of the university or the, sort of, teaching philosophy of individual departments or individual instructors, that it’s becoming much more of a social norm. And so I think that that allows instructors to feel like they can experiment with these sorts of things. And that is the case, is that it is often an experiment and sometimes experiments don’t turn out particularly well. So if the instructors feel like they have the support of the department or their institution to kind of put forth a course like this but does something a little bit different I think is something that is sort of a wave that’s coming through now. Sort of allowing people to do that. 
Interviewer: And how do you feel the value – what value for the student? Is the question. 
Interviewee: Sorry? What was the question? 
Interviewer: What’s the value for the student in being engaged this way? I know you’ve also hinted at it already. 
Interviewee: I think there’s a number of things. I think firstly…the stakes might feel higher when someone is creating something that’s going to be open and accessible by a wider community. And I think that success in creating that type of resource or project results in a deeper sense of ownership and accomplishment over the work. So I think that creating this resource that exists out in the world is something that students maybe don’t expect that they’ll feel particularly fond of, but once they do that and they see people using it, there’s a deep sense of accomplishment there. 
I think as well it helps to create, at least in terms of these online projects, something that they can take to an employer to evidence specific skills that they’ve gained, or use as a writing sample. 
Interviewer: Right. 
Interviewee: And show that they’re engaging with a wider community beyond just the classroom which I think can be particularly useful for job interviews and those sorts of things. And I know even for myself, moving to higher education out of my undergraduate degree that I was able to use my digital edition as a sort of a research portfolio to present to institutions to say, “These are some of the things that I have done.”
Interviewer: How does this all relate to your own teaching philosophy?	
Interviewee: Um…I think that one of the other things that open education does is flip the hierarchies of the classroom which is something that is important to my own teaching philosophy. The idea of collaboration versus sort of this instructor-student relationship. Fostering students’ sense of curiosity in exploration as they kind of work to create their own projects or narratives and present them to an audience through their own sense of agency and sort of being a facilitator for those things instead of just where it’s a relationship of some sort of information regurgitation. I think that this can be done in many different ways to foster that idea of curiosity and exploration and creation in the classroom, but I think that the open movement is really helpful in making those values deep and intrinsic to a classroom because you are involving a broader audience. So I think that it facilitates that almost naturally that the instructor and the students become, sort of, collaborators on something that they’re presenting outside instead of it just being the student presenting something just to the instructor. 
Interviewer: Right. 
Okay well I think that pretty much covers all of the prompts I wanted to provide. Is there anything else that you want to mention or that I didn’t ask that you thought I would?
Interviewee: No, I think that that’s pretty much what I was expecting. 
Interviewer: And no further questions?
Interviewee: I don’t have any further questions now. 
Interviewer: Okay. Well I want to really thank you for your time, and I’m again sorry that we had some technical blips at the beginning and thanks for persevering. 
Interviewee: These things happen. 
Interviewer: Go ahead. 
Interviewee: Oh, I was just going to say that it’s just funny because I feel like a lot of what I was talking about was being able to figure out the technology and yet, there still are times when we can’t! 
Interviewer: Well you know, one of my design philosophies is to always have a Plan B, and had I been relying on that environment for the recording and didn’t have my trusty desktop recorder, I would have been in a bad space. 
Interviewee: Oh, yes. We can never fully trust these things. Sometimes we’re able to wrangle them, but other times they’re just prove insurmountable.
Interviewer: If anything else comes to mind, don’t hesitate to contact me. You will get an offer for a $20 gift card at Chapters for being part of the interview, so I hope you’ll enjoy that. And if you, as I said, think of anything else or want to engage further, don’t hesitate to reach out. 
Interviewee: Sure. Thank you very much. 
Interviewer: Well thank you and I wish you a good weekend!
Interviewee: Yes, you too!


Interview 005 Mar 7, 2018 
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewer: By default Zoom records the video too, but I won’t be using the video as part of the analysis. If you wanted to turn your video off you’re welcome to do that as well. 
Interviewee: Meh, it feels more like you’re talking to someone if you can see them. 
Interviewer: Yeah, it’s kind of nice to be able to do this. So thank you very much, again. I just want to get verbal consent because we won’t have a chance to meet today. If you’re willing to provide verbal consent on the audio recording that would be sufficient for conducting the interview. 
Interviewee: Yes, that is fine. 
Interviewer: Okay. Thank you again. So I’m going to start with some, sort of, introductory demographic information and then we’ll move into more talking about your practise. And I know you\re kind of wearing multiple hats now. So it’s up to you from where you want to frame your answer. Most of the study’s been looking at faculty’s perspectives. So um…yeah, I’ll let you, sort of, decide how you want to frame your answers. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
[Demographic info redacted]
Interviewer: So now I wanted to talk about your engagement with what I’ve termed ‘open educational practises.’ In the consent form of course there’s many different forms and terms for this. I’m just curious how you’re defining open educational practises?
Interviewee: Yeah, that’s the million dollar question. So I think of open educational practises as a wider category than open pedagogy and the only way I can describe it is to list examples. I don’t have a full – I don’t have a clear definition. So, open educational practises can include things like having in your teaching practise you have students contribute to a knowledge that’s open in the sense that it’s publicly viewable, it’s freely accessible, and it’s openly licensed. Although there can be a range. Like maybe it’s not openly licensed but they still make it public, right? That can be an open practise in your teaching. You can also in your teaching have students connect with people outside the course in various ways. Like, maybe some people outside the course are commenting on blogs  and student are getting in a conversation around that.
So those are things inside the course, but I think of open practise as wider than that because it can also include things like reflecting on your own process and your own teaching and learning. You know, “how did I do this thing that my students thought was great? Let me give you, you know, the steps I took. And here’s the materials.” And all that sort of thing. So it can be, like, reflections on a blog post on teaching and learning, it can be sharing your process about how you did something in teaching and learning. 
So I guess, you know, if I had to try to put all that together it would be something around teaching and learning practise that has to do with – well use the word ‘open’…”opening up…” – opening up the class beyond just the walls of the classroom and maybe just beyond the participants that are officially registered. However, there’s complication because sometimes people talk about open practise as being open in the sense of sharing responsibility between the professor and the students. So, co-creating the curriculum, for example. Or having the students be able to help choose what the assignments are going to be, or something like that. That isn’t necessarily connecting outside the course, but it is, kind of, more power sharing within the course. That’s a really hard question!
Interviewer: As I’ve been engaging with the research myself, I agree that it’s really tricky. At first when I started I was like, “okay this is what I’m researching,” but now I have less of a sense of exactly what it is. Right? So I’d agree with you. There’s different threads and different aspects that can permeate into our practise that doesn’t necessarily mean open in a sense that others would understand. It may just be flexible. Right?
Interviewee: Right. Or I’m trying to think what that power sharing one relates to. I guess it’s like student autonomy…breaking down – not breaking down because you can’t’, but reducing the status differential between instructors and students. I’ve often thought about ‘why does that count as open?’ You know, why? It doesn’t really fit some of the other examples but so many people do talk about it that way. Maybe it’s about students becoming – it’s kind of like when students contribute to public knowledge it’s a way for them to actually, kind of, elevate their status as they’re not just learners, they’re also contributors to, you know, the world of the knowledge in the world and projects in the world, they’re also contributors to the classroom, I suppose. There’s some link there, but I still haven’t worked it all out. This is like somebody else recently asked me to define, “Can you just come up with all of the various kind of “open” and you know just kind of say what they all are?” And I was like, “That’s a five year project I’ve been working on for a long time.” 
Interviewer:  Yeah, I moved away from, sort of, the Wiley framework of what’s possible in light of open education? But I’m returning to that because it is actually something you can hold onto. 
Interviewee: It is. 
Interviewer: These are the things you can do and maybe these are the things that can change the way you can teach or what you get students to do because now they can take things, rework them, and publish them. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: So I’ve been finding that useful to come back to. 
Interviewee: I agree and that is the easiest way – maybe not the easiest – but it is a nice, succinct way to think about it and what is made possible – so for open pedagogy – what is made possible in teaching and learning because certain things are – have been open licensed. 
And –
Interviewer: Yeah, and I think – go ahead.
Interviewee: There’s a lot of things that are made possible. 
Interviewer: Yeah, and examples emerging all over. Which I think are useful and helpful to faculty to see ‘what does this look like?’ So trying to get as many examples in the eyes of others to see how this can work and how you can design teaching and learning in these ways I think is important. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: How long have you been engaging in this way?
Interviewee: 2013 was the first time I really started learning about a lot of these topics in open education. That was when I first heard about OER because I was on sabbatical and I took an open online course where we talked about open education and OER. And then I took another online course focused specifically on open education. So it was in, you know, I guess it was about five years ago that I really started getting into it more. Before that I had learned about things like creative commons licenses for I don’t know when that was. It was probably like 2010 or something. I don’t remember. It was fairly early on. And but I still didn’t quite get it. I didn’t, you know, I wasn’t using it regularly, I didn’t have a public site to put anything on. You know. So I had heard about it, but it wasn’t really clicking until later. Yeah. 
Interviewer: So the catalyst was kind of that open course?
Interviewee: Mhm.
Interviewer: And taking some time, and having some time to think about it a bit more?
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: And can you share any ways in your teaching that you’re changing your practise or might have brought some of these principles in?
Interviewee: Mhm. So…I feel like the kind of person who says, “there’s all of these wonderful things you could do.” And then who doesn’t do very many of them. So I have often thought, “man can I do Wikipedia kind of assignment in my first year philosophy course?” And the reason why I haven’t – because you could. You could do something like, even if they don’t write a Wikipedia article, they could at least do a gap analysis. You know, what’s missing from Wikipedia that you think would be useful given what we’ve studied about this philosopher and then draft something. Like, you wouldn’t have to actually have them be on the platform. But even then there’s over a hundred students in a class and the onboarding to kind of get a sense of what Wikipedia is and what the roles are and all that, is just kind of daunting. So I haven’t done that. But I keep thinking “I’ve got to do that.” Because I strongly believe there are really good values in adding to Wikipedia. Not just because it’s public and students think their work is going somewhere but there’s that. But also, the way they make you write, it’s like you have to write for a lay audience, you’re supposed to not be interpreting, you know, research. You’re just supposed to be giving the research. You have to cite everything, you can just spout some stuff off and get away with it like you might be able to on an essay. 
So I think the kind of skills that it teaches you are really good. But I haven’t done it. So what I have done in various courses I’ve had students write blog posts that are publicly available and in one case…because this was a course where there were multiple sections of the same class, they were reading the same things, they each had their own blog site – so each section had its own blog site, there were about twenty students – or sometimes students each had their own blogs, but all of them got pushed into one site. So there were like eighty students whose blog posts would show up on one site but they were in different sections. But they were reading the same material, and actually listening to the same lectures, we had shared lectures. So that way they could see what students in other sections of that course were talking about around the same material and these were also made public. And we got one of the authors on our reading list – so somebody we were reading later in the term…no this was after we had already read that person. So we had read this person’s work, students had blogged on it, he Googles himself and found the students and, you know, made some interesting useful comments and then he said, “Hey if you ever want a guest lecturer, you know, I can come out.” And we were teaching his work the next year, too, so we, you know, brought him out as a guest lecturer which was really exciting I think because how rarely do you get to actually hear from the author that you’re reading. Right? And that was because of the public blog post. Right? 
So I thought that was really useful. Even if we hadn’t had that nice interaction, students will write differently, you know, if they know it’s not just going to their professor. And especially if I can tell them the story and say, “You know what? The person you’re writing about might be reading this.” That might freak them out too much but for some of them it might be exciting. They might actually get to hear from that person. So I do that. I have students writing posts that I call ‘philosophy in the world’ posts for my Introduction to Philosophy class and these are blog posts but they’re a specific assignment and what they have to do – well there’s various options – but one option I they have to find something out in their life that they think has philosophical content, or is something like a philosophical activity. And it could be anything from a novel, a film, I’ve had people talk about video games, I’ve had people talk about stand-up comedy…anything, really. And they have to give, after the course is pretty much done, they have to give their version of what philosophy is because this is an intro course, you know, so part of the idea is just get them to understand what philosophy is. So they have to give their definition of philosophy, connect to one of the philosophers we read and then connect it to this other thing, what they found out in the world.
I started that project partly for the students because one of my learning objectives is: you know, you’re taking this intro to philosophy course you may never take another philosophy course, what I want you to come out with among other things is a sense of just what philosophy is, and a sense that it’s not just an academic exercise. It’s not just about reading Socrates. Right? It’s something we do all of the time. Right? We just don’t label it that. So I did it largely for the students in the class, but then later I thought, “This is kind of cool because lots of people don’t know what philosophy is.” And since, you know, they have an option they don’t have to share it publicly they can just give it to me, but if they do share it publicly what I’ve done on my course website is I’ve categorized them like film, novels, video games, or whatever, and then people can click on the categories and see “okay that’s why this is a philosophical kind of thing, or that is why this is a philosophical kind of thing.” 
So I – that’s one way I try to have my students contribute to something that I think is a public good because philosophy is misunderstood or not understood at all. 
Interviewer: I would imagine those are quite interesting to assess as well. 
Interviewee: Oh yeah. Yeah and they’re not really all I can do in assessing them is…did you follow the instructions? Right? Because I’m not assessing “is your definition of philosophy the right one?” There’s multiple ways to think about it. I do assess, “did you – whatever definition you came up, did you apply it to the thing in a way that makes sense?” I can assess that. But I can’t say “no. This novel is not philosophical.” And usually I wouldn’t say that anyway because usually what they pick is. 
Yeah, so that’s been really interesting and I’ve thought about turning that into something like a Wiki page for students to build on later. I haven’t just like technologically figured out, again, how to do that with 100 students. It’s not impossible, but…I haven’t done it yet. 
Interviewer: I think there’s real barriers with – you’ve got two issues I think: the first year, and also large group. I mean, I would think it would be a daunting task as well and I think it would be for many instructors. I’m wondering what we might be able to do to better support those sorts of learning designs? I don’t know if you have any thoughts?
Interviewee: It always comes down to time for me. It’s not motivation or ability. This may differ from person to person but I always – I feel like I’m pretty capable of constructing whatever technological issue needs to be constructed as long as it doesn’t involve hard coding anything. Or I can find someone who can help me. It’s really just the time because what happens when you have a large class is…everything that you assign takes a long time to mark. Right? And you can do it in a way that you don’t really have to mark it, you just have to say “did they do it or not?” but then what comes out of this, or what they produce that you’re hoping can be a value to the world, you still have to help them make it better before it goes out. Right? You don’t want to just…I mean I do that with a blog post. Blog posts are just whatever they are because they’re blog posts, they’re meant to be, you know, kind of, informal. But other things, you know, if you can take the time to give feedback and have them make it better then I think that actually does a service to the rest of the world but that takes a great deal of time. 
So when you have a large class I think that’s the harder part. So there’s – I mean there are people who are doing really interesting things about, you know, having students write chapters of textbooks or something like that and I just don’t see that being easily feasible with a large class in terms of time. What I am doing – one option I’ve given my students this year for participation marks – just multiple things they could do to count as participating and engaging in the course, and one of them is to write a paragraph or two introduction to one of our readings, because we don’t use a textbook I just use free readings on the web or articles that, you know, the library has subscriptions to, and I say “I could write an introduction to these things like you would get in a textbook, but I’m not writing from the perspective of students. I don’t know what you think other students would need to know to help them understand this text.” So I’ve given people the option: “Can you send me a paragraph or two where you help other students in the class, so later students in the class, figure out what they should focus on. What’s important in this text?” And I’ve gotten two of those so far and they’re quite good. But again it’s just an option, so I don’t have a hundred. And I feel l like that’s manageable. And maybe slowly building up these kinds of things that could be useful not only for my future students, but I’ve also asked them “Can I put them public, you know, on our course website which is public?” And I’ll only do it if they say “yes,” obviously.
Interviewer: How do you find students respond to that invitation? 
Interviewee: Um…it’s mixed. So they always have the option. Like I said, my course website is public, any blog post they do, any “the Philosophy in the World” post they do, or this participation assignment, they can do publicly or not. There’s always that option. Or they can do it publicly with a pseudonym or something like that. And I have found in the last – because I’ve been doing this for a few years now – in the last few years more and more students are opting for the privacy – the private, or the anonymous. When I first did it, like, you know, three or four years ago, I was surprised at how many students were like, “hey I’ll just post whatever, you know, public.” And I wonder if they really thought about it. Like, really quite quick. I mean, nothing bad ever happened, but more and more students are like, “if I post it publicly, I don’t want my name attached. Or I just want to post it to you.” But I haven’t really asked them why. You know, I give my reasons for why I think posting publicly is useful to other people, but I don’t pressure them in any way or even ask them why. 
Interviewer: Certainly. Yeah I mentioned, I think, when we met last that the second study I’ll be doing is going to be from the students’’ perspective, largely around the digital literacies that they bring that might be able to apply to some of these activities we might get them to do. But I think there’s also some questions in there about, you know, why? Or what are you – what are the issues with doing that sort of work in the public sphere?
Interviewee: Yes. Yeah. And students will have some really useful perspectives, I think. Yeah. 
Interviewer: I’m just trying to formulate that proposal now. So off to the races, as always. 
But maybe I’ll send you the questions, because I’m designing a survey for that if you’re interested. I was hoping to get a few people’s eyes on that who might have an interest in the research but also know something from their own work with students.
Interviewee: Sure, yeah. I’d be happy to. I’m not an expert in survey design but I can at least say what questions I think sound useful from my experience. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’d appreciate any – I know you’re super busy and I don’t want to take too much of your time. 
Interviewee: No, I am interested. 
Interviewer: Yeah. Um…I wanted to ask about the facilities that you have available at the university or externally that you take – you make use of to enact open educational practises whether it be supports or technical infrastructure, space, buildings. Thoughts on what you make use of?
Interviewee: Yeah. So, people and technological infrastructure, I don’t think I need any particular space given what I do. I don’t know. If open educational practises can include creating OER, like, videos, then yeah. I could have used a better space. So when I was making some videos that I released openly and we had a terrible space in the basement of one of our buildings where the IT people said, “yeah this is where you can record your audio and your video.” And it had this horrible ceiling fan that on all the time, it was really loud, there was a terrible echo in the room, it was awful. So I just went home and did it. I think things are better now. I think there are better spaces. So yeah, sometimes space. But mostly not. Mostly people because there’s people at our Centre for Teaching and Learning and Technology who are interested in open education. We have an open education group that meets monthly. Some of those people are faculty, some of those people are staff, some of those people are librarians. And the way I rely on them as supports is to get ideas, like, what are other people doing? What have you seen in other courses? How can the library help? What are you doing in your course that I might consider? 
But the other way is – and I haven’t done this specifically but I would – if we were doing a Wikipedia project, we have people who can literally come into your class and help the students understand a bit more about what this is all about. Right? So, there are sometimes you can actually have direct support for your project by a staff person depending on what you’re doing. 
So people, a little bit of space, but mostly technology. At [institution name] we have a WordPress installation where you can – students can easily create their own blogs. So I’ve had them do that sometimes where you can have your own course site on the blogs on the WordPress so that it is publicly available to anybody and students can log into that site and post on it. We have a Wiki, we have a WikiMedia – not WikiMedia…what’s it called? MediaWiki. We have a MediaWiki installation called the [institution name] Wiki and that’s really useful as a space where a number of students can collaborate together on one thing and it always keeps a history, so nobody can permanently mess it up. And we use that – I’ve used that in the past for things like students in smaller groups each having a Wiki page where they would share notes on the readings or something like that within their group. I’ve used it – I’ve created a bibliography for a course one time and asked students to contribute to it. So it’s all in one place. So, I mean these things – and it is also public. The [institution name] Wiki is publicly visible, only edited if you have a [institution name] account. But still, it’s always publicly visible. Right? 
So I think the WordPress and the Wiki are the two things that I’ve used the most in terms of open stuff. We now have Canvas as our LMS, our Learning Management System. And Canvas does allow for you to make your course public – publicly viewable. But I have almost nothing on that system, it’s all on WordPress. So I haven’t really used that. But it is possible. 
Interviewer: And how do you feel that open educational practise may or may not align with the norms of the institutional, organizational, and social context?
Interviewee: Hm…the norms of the institutional, organizational, and social context? I’m trying to think where to start. In some sense the norms are changing. So in terms of a post-secondary context, the norms are changing in regards to research and publications in that of course in Canada the major granting – government granting bodies – are saying, you know, “You have to publish open access,” or you know, “only have…” I can’t remember what the rules are, but I think you have to deposit at least pre-print somewhere before the thing in print in a non-open access version, or you may have to publish your data open access. I’m not really sure, I haven’t looked into it because I haven’t gotten one of these grants. I’m not sure. But I know there’s a lot of talk now about “ah we have to do more open data and more open access publishing.” Right? Or at least depositing your pre-print. 
So in that sense the culture and the norms are changing for research. I’m not seeing as much, but you know it’s just anecdotal. Are the norms changing for teaching and learning? I think there’s…within pockets there’s people who definitely think, you know, “yes let’s go open in teaching and learning.” But I think it’s smaller pockets. I find it harder to…what’s the word I want to use…encourage…the creation of open educational resources or making your course more visible that there’s still the sense that people… your teaching is locked down. That’s a different area. Your research should be public, your teaching should be locked away. And I think there are numerous good reasons for that; students have paid for it, everybody else hasn’t. Some people are very worried about – they feel more vulnerable in their teaching, they’re very worried about ramifications that could have on their career. This is a good reason. I understand. I’m not saying everyone needs to do it. 
The one about…I just lost my train of thought. So the teaching should be locked down because students have paid for it and others haven’t. I don’t think that fully works because the course is not just the materials. Like, the course is not just the website. If it were, I wouldn’t be paid. Once I made the website I’d be done. So, thank god that’s not the case! 
So what the students are getting is the actual experience of the course not just the materials that you happen to post. Anyways, so I think that the culture around open education has not moved terribly far in my own anecdotal experience yet. The culture around assigning open resources is moving faster. I’m hearing a lot about, you know, “oh jeez, I could assign a $250 textbook or I could find open resources, duh!” So many more people are interested in that. 
Interviewer: Yeah.
Interviewee: That’s less threatening. 
Interviewer: Certainly. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: On the – because there’s now a teaching stream in a number of universities where you wouldn’t be doing as much research, potentially, and you wouldn’t have those sort of clear guidelines, “make sure some of it is open access.” Do you know – are there deliverables, or I don’t know what they would call them for the teaching stream – and is there any alignment with open educational practise as far as you see?
Interviewee: There are deliverables. It’s an interesting question because we struggle with our teaching stream on what those should be. So whenever you’re evaluating someone for tenure and promotion you have a dossier and that dossier includes the CV and if you’re a research professor it usually includes also a little bit about teaching but mostly it includes your articles or your book or something, right? So the people reviewing you actually read your research. So what do you do for a teaching stream professor? This has been sort of a perennial discussion. And I think we’ve moved further along those roads and what we do as we look at teaching materials in addition to student evaluation scores and peer feedback on teaching, so you know peer visits, we look at course materials like syllabi, like assignment instructions, if somebody has a website we can look at that, if they’re willing to let us see it. Right? So sometimes people could submit videos they’ve created, open educational resources like textbooks that they’ve made public. 
So does it align with open practise? At [institution name], yes in the sense that you don’t have to make your stuff open. But if you do…if you create open educational resources and contribute them to some kind of repository – which I think could just be like YouTube, it’s not clear – that can count for what we call educational leadership. And educational leadership at [institution name], again just within the teaching stream, is something you have to do in that stream and it’s any kind of advancement or leadership around teaching and learning that has impact beyond your own class. 
So if you are creating open educational resources and they are being used by others, that has impact beyond your own class. But you don’t have to do that, that’s not required to get tenure, it’s just one way to show educational leadership. So that was – I’m pretty sure that was the way I got my promotion was through that channel because that was most of what my educational leadership had been at that point. Yeah. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I think it’s something that we struggle with as well at VIU because of they’re all teaching faculty or teaching focused, and we’re also trying to figure out “well how can they show evidence of either engaging in professional development or talking about their teaching” because I would say that’s a form of open educational practise as well, sharing “well this is what I do and this is how it worked or not,” and that can be hugely helpful to other faculty to have that window into practise across disciplines. 
Interviewee: Yeah I did talk about my blog because I have a blog where I…well now it’s mostly about Open Ed, but for a while it was mostly about my teaching practise and I remember putting it in my tenure file and “look here’s a blog I have where I reflect on teaching and this could potentially be useful for others,” and I think I even had some Google Analytics on it or something. 
Interviewer: Alternative metrics, of course. They’re there and they do count. I think they do show impact, right?
Interviewee: Yeah, yeah, exactly. 
Interviewer: Can you reflect on your own teaching philosophy or beliefs about knowledge and how they relate to the work that you do? 
Interviewee: Yeah…teaching philosophy is big. One of the things that I always try to do in my class – in every class I have is find opportunities – I guess like I was saying earlier to sort of break down some of the authority differences. And not just because I kind of am a more democratic person, but because I think that students – I think that just…passively learning from an expert is not going to produce the best learning. That if they are involved in guiding a discussion or, you know, providing – one of the things I do is I ask them, every class they have the option – I have a Google Doc where they can write questions and comments on – and I go through that and then I see “ah there was a lot of questions about X maybe we should, you know, take a little turn over here and we’ll talk about X in the class for a while.” That’s going to lead to better learning. It’s going to be the things that they are interested in and the things that they are wondering about. Right?
And I think a lot of people do this. You don’t have to do it through open education, it’s just sort of generally. So something where they are helping to guide the course to some degree and something where they have…they have more choice in what they want to focus on. So I try to always give the options in their assignments, you know, “you could do this, or you could do this, or you could do this. Choose.” So some of those things around that are related to part of my teaching philosophy at least. And then that does connect into…connects into open practise in the sense of, you know, students being on a similar level as producers of knowledge and producers of content and being…being important to listen to. So it’s not just my voice that matters in the class, that what they have to say about what they’re studying makes a big difference and is just as valuable. Now, when you take that idea, that can underpin students contributing to a wider public knowledge or something else. Like, just because they’re students doesn’t mean they don’t have really useful things to contribute. In fact, they might have more useful things to contribute because they haven’t been locked away reading philosophy for so long. In some cases. 
So it can connect in that way, I think. In the sense as students as partners, students as co-creators, kind of thing, can connect to open practises. 
Interviewer: How do you find students respond to that invitation?
Interviewee: Some of them love it. It is not universally liked. Yes. And you may have heard this from other people as well because it’s a common refrain that I try to make my courses interactive, I try to make it so that they’re doing stuff, and they’re helping to guide the discussion, and you know at the end of the course or even if you do a mid-course survey you hear, “I just want to hear you lecture more. I don’t want to hear from the other students. If I already knew this stuff I wouldn’t be here” kind of thing. So yeah. And I do see the value in lecturing, and I do have expertise and there’s value in that so what I try to do is a balance. And when you’re balancing like that you’re not going to please everybody. But everybody’s going to get it a little bit. 
And I don’t know what the motivation is for why students just would rather have a lecture besides maybe that’s what they’re used to, I don’t know, because I haven’t been to high school in years. It feels like you’re learning when someone is telling you something, you’re writing it down, and you’re memorizing it. That feels like learning. When you’re having an open ended philosophical conversation and you don’t end up with an answer, that doesn’t feel like learning. That feels like you’re just wasting your time. But you really are learning, and you’re digging deeper into the issues, and you’re learning how to think about them in a more critical way. I think I need to do a better job of telling that story of how they’re still learning. 
Interviewer: Certainly. I had a thought too, but it’s just escaped me. It was on the student perspective and…I know in one of my colleagues courses, she’s quite flexible with her approach and students are at first very confused by it. Like, “what exactly do we need to do?” Because students are busy people, right?
Interviewee: Yeah.
Interviewer: And they’re driven towards success with five or six courses on the go they’re like, “I just need to know so I can set my calendar.” Right? “I don’t want to decide on what it’s going to be as I go.”
So yeah, it’s an interesting perspective. I think high school is changing quicker than post-secondary in many ways with the curriculum changes and different approaches to assessment but I don’t know for sure because I don’t spend a lot of time in that world and I don’t have kids in the system. 
Interviewee: Yeah. My kid’s in grade five so it’s a very different kind of thing. But they do – I mean, as far as I can tell, they’re doing a lot of active stuff and they’re doing a lot of stuff where they’re producing, you know, things for each other and for themselves. They’re not posting publicly because that’s not usually what grade school student do, but…you know. 
Interviewer: So that’s about all the questions I had for the interview, but is there anything that you want to mention or I didn’t ask that you thought I might have? I think we have a couple of minutes left before you have to get to your next meeting.
Interviewee: I did take a couple of notes before we started on, you know, sort of brainstorming what kinds of open practises I do and I don’t know if you consider this an open practise, but I’ve been talking with somebody else about all of the various things that could be open practises and one of them is connecting – I mentioned this before – connecting with people outside the course in numerous ways. And as we were talking through that we thought, “Okay well what about community-based learning? Is this an open practise because in some sense you’re opening the doors of the classroom? Right? You’re connecting with people outside. And the way that we had discussed open practises as connecting, it sounded like it was. So then that might involve if you define that as an open practise that might involve a lot more people because there’s a lot of community based learning, or community engaged learning. And what I do in that regard? So again, I have options for my Philosophy in the World post. One of them is – this isn’t really community based, but it’s kind of – you go to a philosopher’s café which is this – these are like weekly meetings all around the lower mainland talking about philosophical topics, and they’re held out in the community so you could be with who knows who, right? Anybody. And then you come back and you sort of write about that experience and what you think philosophy is based on the course. So there’s at least some going beyond, you know? 
And then the other option is this year, this is a new one: the BC Government is having a consultation currently on their poverty reduction strategy and the people in our Community Engaged Learning Office brought this to me and said, “Do you think your students might be interested in participating in this? Because we’re trying to get a bunch of [institution name] students together to provide the student perspective on this government proposed policy, or strategy.” And it fits with what we’re talking about because one of the things in our course is around poverty reduction, so…so they can go participate in that. And they’re just talking to other students in that sense, but it’s connecting more directly to something, like, you know, in the real world. So, I don’t know if you think, you know, community connections count as open practise, but it’s just something that came to us as a colleague and I were talking recently. 
Interviewer: I agree with you and I think universities have been good at doing this for many years. I mean there was – we had an open pedagogy course redesign and we had a faculty member come and he doesn’t use technology but he does all kinds of things by engaging the community and he’s like, “I’ve been doing this for twenty-five years. This is wonderful.” But I think the part’s that’s different for more open educational practises is the capturing. Right?
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: So having the student reflect on it. Or building something that says, “This is the project, this is what it did.” So that others can come and carry it forward. Because we have – the problem with students going in to the community every year and started from scratch. Right? Rather build upon what’s been done in the years past. I think that’s one of the things we’ve been trying to…how we link – or at least in my context at VIU – link community engagement to open education. 
Interviewee: Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. And we do have some courses right now who are doing, they’re writing things for community partners that then we are showcasing on at open case studies websites, so that, you know, it’s producing something that is useful for the community but also is shared out and could be useful for other people as well. So, yeah that makes sense. 
Interviewer: Yeah, excellent. 
Interviewee: Well I think that was it. 
Interviewer: Okay. Well I want to take this opportunity to thank you again. I really appreciate it. I enjoyed the conversation and if anything comes to mind or you want to ask any questions, of course you’re welcome to do that. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: You’ve got my email, so don’t hesitate. 
Interviewee: Okay. So I can wait to send you the consent form until I see the transcript?
Interviewer: Yeah. I don’t think I’m going to collect the physical signature, I think the audio consent is going to be sufficient. And the question of do you want your transcript to be an open data artifact, I’ll present to you at the time that you have your transcript and then you can make it anonymous or not. I’ve got the audio recording, you’re also free to have that. There’s also the video recording which won’t be used as part of the research, but you’re welcome to that as well. This is your data. 
Interviewee: That’s true, but I don’t need it. 
Interviewer: And I will – to thank you for the time you’ve offered here today I’ll be sending you a small gift certificate for chapters so that you can be compensated for you time spent today. 
Interviewee: Sure. Cool.
Interviewer: Okay thanks so much. 
Interviewee: Right, yeah. I’ll see you at some other event I’m sure. 
Interviewer: I hope so. All the best!
Interviewee: Okay, you too. Bye. 


Interview 007 March 21, 2018 
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewee: I mean, what good use you could do with a video anyway? It’s just the voice that matters. 
Interviewer: Yeah, so I’m just going to start the recorder. Thanks again for taking the time. 
Interviewee: My pleasure. 
Interviewer: And you’ve had a chance to take a look at the consent form. I’ll just get you to confirm you’re willing to participate on the audio recording?
Interviewee: Yes, I confirm. 
Interviewer: Thank you.
So on consent, I’m not sure if you noticed, there was an option for Open data. To have the transcript part of an open data artifact. I’m not going to ask you to make that decision now. When I send you the transcript, you can have a look at it and then I’ll prompt you then to decide if you wish to release that. 
Interviewee: Okay. That is fine. I think it should be okay. I mean…yeah. 
Interviewer: Yeah. You’ll have a chance to review it and make that decision when it’s appropriate. 
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: So I was going to start with just some preliminary information and then I’m going to chat to you about your teaching practise. 
[Personal information redacted for privacy]
Interviewer: Okay. So now I was going to chat to you more about your teaching practise and you’re probably gleaned from the consent form and the description of the project that I’m interested in Open education and how teaching and learning is changing in light of a more open world, Open educational resources, Open processes, Open scholarship. How are you defining Open in your teaching?
Interviewee: It’s a good question because always the first thing that comes to my mind, because I’m doing all of these research projects on OER and assessing teaching and learning and things like that. I think of the UNESCO definitions of what Open education and Open educational resources are. Basically, I think the main thing is that it’s about resources that are used in teaching and learning that are available freely, most of the time. And that are considered an education – are considered something like public domain with some nuances in terms of the creative commons licenses, etc. But basically it’s about using – creating and using such resources and facilitating student learning in ways that are diverse, in ways that take into consideration a variety of perspectives, a variety of disciplines, and my field is interdisciplinary anyway, and in ways that do not pose additional burden to their pockets. 
Interviewer: Right. And do you find it changes what you can do as an educator?
Interviewee: It does. It gives me a lot more options than I expected, and given that my own undergrad was more than twenty years ago, that old school thing with the just textbooks and particularly here in Canada having to buy these expensive textbooks, I think that it gives me as an instructor, it gives me so many options and so many ways of combining things and ways of helping students open their minds. 
Interviewer: So flexibility in terms of your design. How does it open the students’ minds, I wonder? Just by different perspectives and different – or is it more about the types of media you’re able to use?
Interviewee: It’s everything. It’s everything. For instance they do not just have to read one long document, or one textbook and that’s it. I use all sorts of resources from audio and video to having them use databases and create artifacts and websites – create websites. And parts of MOOCs, for instance, from around the world. So it’s not just the type, but it’s also that it brings in a variety of perspectives, and a variety of examples and case studies, and paradigms ultimately, because it’s not just about reading one book that one or many professors have written and they follow a specific paradigm in the field, but it’s about bringing all these different ideas and perspectives in theory and practise from around the world and I’m not just using North American which is where we are, obviously.  
Interviewer: Did you say you also get students involved in creating and engaging with Open?
Interviewee: Yes. So, for instance, something we started about a year ago through an OER grant at [institution name], and I will continue in it because I’m happy to continue it even though the grant is over, is a database of OER that is sustainability related, and in particular local sustainability related, and I started with a long list of resources that I had put together myself over the years, but then last semester, the fall term, a colleague of mine and I decided to – because we were both teaching courses in this field – we decided to have students contribute to that. So through assignments or through just simple in-class activities, they would define who we are, they would develop the metadata, sort of do some sort of data entry, and that’s how we are keeping the database alive and up to date. And they’re happy to because they’re doing something that is more current, that is more hands-on for them. And it’s the internet, right? They’re using their devices for a good reason, in class.  
Interviewer: So you get them going out, searching for things, maybe related to the curriculum, perhaps vetting or assessing them, and then bringing them back for entry into the database?
Interviewee: Yes, I usually give them a short list of criteria for evaluation so that they don’t just bring me, I don’t know, a Vancouver Sun article back. But something that has some standing, that has been peer reviewed, or if not, a piece that comes from a reputable institution, a professor, it has some research basis, or its information based. 
Interviewer: So they’re practising some information literacy there, as well?
Interviewee: Mhm. 
Interviewer: It sounds like. How has that gone?
Interviewee: It’s multiple skills and at the same time it makes them feel more interested in the topics and more interested while they’re in a four hour class in the evening. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I bet. And do you have to teach them about things like licenses and formats and some of the technical bits?
Interviewee: Yeah I do give them some information, but because I don’t want to give them everything in terms of the exact metadata, I give them a list of things they need to search for, some websites they can consult, I give them an overview of a variety of creative commons licenses, or in which part of the website you will find that it talks about licenses. So things like that. I guide them. 
Interviewer: How’s the experience been like? How are students responding?
Interviewee: Oh, they love it. I only give them something like two or three percent of their grade for that work, and they’re doing it so happily and they collaborate, and they just spend half an hour or an hour in class. It is creative and they learn from each other, as well, because they share them on Canvas, on the Canvas shell of the course, as well. So they like that exchange and that…a little bit of – the feedback that I got from them last semester was about learning to research online for a purpose, for a – not just Googling something, but actually doing a more thorough research as if you were in the library and were searching for books and resources, same thing but online which I think nobody teaches to do. 
Interviewer: Yeah I often wonder where students will get the literacies of digital literacies associated with working with information in the Information Age where it’s abundant, and contested, ever changing. So I think that’s a good exercise to have them – 
Interviewee: Exactly. I think there other thing – well there’s something I mentioned, and maybe it’s this group of people that are a bit more mentally aware, etc. but I think that something they also realize is that they’re not just – they shouldn’t just take in everything they read on the internet, that you can actually research things that you read. So there were a couple of cases where they came back to me with, “Oh I found this article,” or “Oh I found this report,” and then when we looked into who wrote the report, what their funding was, realized it was biased. 
So it’s things like that that they aren’t as well, and just this morning I had this discussion about fake news with my husband. It’s trending. It’s giving me another opportunity to teach things like that to students. 
Interviewer: You mentioned the grant that you got. Is that when you first got started with this? Or have you been engaging with Open beyond that?
Interviewee: Um, well it’s the first time I officially started working formally with a framework. I started working with OER because previously…in my previous teaching work I was using mostly other resources and that was many, many years ago, even before the internet was so abundant in information, and then I was a consultant for about ten years, so I didn’t really teach that much during that time. And when I first came here in Canada in 2014 and I started being a TA for online courses, I realized that there is more than just a textbook or just one source of information for students that can be a good source of information. But I would say that through this the first grant we got in 2015 – because I’ve done three with OER, kind of, consecutive one building through to the other, but through the first grant we got that was when I started using a framework of what that is, collecting the metadata, associating most of the resources I was finding with some sort of guidelines for instructors, a worksheet maybe for the students. So that was the first time it was really more structured work. 
Interviewer: The first grant was when?
Interviewee: The first one was 2015.
Interviewer: Okay. I assume that what you’re building every year, they grow it. Or are they building a new one every year? The databases got continuity over the years?
Interviewee: Well the database was built through the second grant about a year ago. Yeah, last spring. And for now, I am continuing it while I’m at [institution name] and there is some sort of loose promise from the library to take it on afterwards. They have all of the login details and everything.
Interviewer: But you integrate it into your teaching so that students are feeding that? And it’s growing every time you teach it?
Interviewee: Yes, students are providing me with the resources and I am adding them to the website/database myself. The students don’t have access to edit the website. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: Because otherwise it would be very difficult to give each student login and password.
Interviewer: Certainly. As a sessional, do you find there are any challenges doing something in that way? Do you find – I mean you had a colleague, I think, that you mentioned that you worked with on this. But it’s kind of a different approach to teaching perhaps and even the way you source resources, I know some departments you know, “the way we do things is with this textbook,” or there’s cultures like that. Did you have any experience with that?
Interviewee: Well for that last part you mentioned, I didn’t have any difficulties or challenges…well almost. So basically I was free to use whatever OER I wanted, as long as there was also some balance, which I have kept to 50/50 with peer reviewed papers and academic journal papers. So that has been a good thing and I have to make an asterisks here and note that this is probably because I am not in a department per se, but I’m teaching in a program and it’s just four or five instructors, and it’s just a small group of people who teach in that program. So it was easier for me to revise the old syllabus I got and to use things like that. And it was also a quite interesting experience to transfer my experience to the other instructors and now some of them are using OER as well. I think that the only challenge has to do with – so this course, this program, all of them, they are offered every year both in class and online in Canvas, alternating. So my main challenge was that there were times where in the Canvas course – so, for instance, this semester in the course I taught last semester in class now to offer online, and in CODE, you know CODE? The Centre for Online Distance Education came back to us a couple of times saying that, “you know we cannot put that resource on Canvas because we do not have permission, or we don’t have time to ask for permission.” And it’s things like I think it’s mainly lack of time or staff that caused that because I paid special attention to use resources that do not have any copyright or have creative commons attached to them. So it was kind of a fine line and, you know, universities sometimes are not up to speed with what’s happening in the world. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I think there’s cultures and traditions that Open is challenging in some way. So I applaud you for going at it and seeking to contribute to changing that culture. That’s really great that others have looked and seen and even changed their own practise based on what you’re doing. It’s great. 
Interviewee: Thank you. I think that through the OER Grant Program at [institution name], there are many opportunities for instructors to integrate things like that and for programs to update their curriculum and instructors to update their syllabi. Not many people are aware of these grants. Not many people are willing to devote the time. But still, I think it’s taking off bit by bit.
Interviewer: Is it, for you, most about providing free accessible resources? Or are you driven more so by the opportunity to change the way you teach or innovate because of the nature of Open?
Interviewee: Um…I think it’s both. One of the things I’ve always wanted for myself and my work and for whatever it is that I do generally, is to keep evolving it. To be up to…to be updated with what’s new and what are the tools I can use and at the same time because I come from a different culture and from a totally different way of learning and teaching, different educational system, in Greece and in Europe I think that this has helped me decide that I really want to bring more of these perspectives and…yeah. 
Interviewer: Fair enough. Thank you. 
I was just thinking about the facilities that support your work. You’ve mentioned some technologies, and software, infrastructure, support people, space, or buildings. Can you reflect on facilities that are available to you that help you do this work?
Interviewee: Yeah. I would say that the main thing is people; human resources that are available through the library and the Teaching and Learning Centre. And not just if you are an OER grant recipient or RA in my case, but generally there are people in the library whose work is to help instructors and to help faculty in departments integrating more Open resources, and they’re organizing things like, last winter, we had the symposium for universal design for learning which was the first time I heard about it, and now I’m all over it. So it’s things like that that I do appreciate. I would say space. And in terms of software…well we do have Canvas, the online learning management tool, that’s how they call them, or I can put it on my syllabus, or I can provide more information for students. And the other thing is – the other small part of the OER that I use is there have been a couple of resources that are partly OER, they’re not entirely Open but the library provides us access by paying some sort of subscription, or…so there’s sort of – yeah the students just have to register on a website to have access but it’s still free. Things like that. 
Interviewer: And the database that you’ve built, did you have to request that? Or is that available normally to you?
Interviewee: Well it is available. It’s a...it’s like an OER, again. It’s a free and openly accessible database builder, it’s like a site builder: Omeka.net. The only thing is that the library couldn’t get us – well we couldn’t get a premium subscription through the library so we could only create one website for free, one database. But it’s still amazing and I hear that other instructors at [institution name] use it. You know, just have items and their metadata you can create exhibits with them, you can upload additional information documents, etc. I wouldn’t have known about that if it weren’t for the people in the library, the people managing these grants. 
Interviewer: How do you feel that your engagement with Open in your teaching aligns to the norms of the university?
Interviewee: Okay. Let me see how I can put that. So being the person who wrote all three grant proposals so far for the OER grants program, I had to read the related policies and it looks like there is language in the university policies that aligns with the use of these resources. It’s loose and vague but it can still facilitate integration of such resources in the curricula and syllabi. So I would say that the university has to work more on that and make it more explicit. I understand that there are issues, licenses and rights, etc. behind that, but at least there is that language that has facilitated our work. 
Interviewer: Where do you find that? Is that in, like, your Mission and Vision? Or is it…?
Interviewee: It’s a specific policy. I don’t remember the number. But if you want I can send it to you because I found that. There is also I think the Faculty of Environment has some policy document that is related. 
Interviewer: I’m really curious if the way we teach with Open education as a philosophy. So you’ve got students contributing to building a knowledge resource, a collective that they’re creating together. Those are, kind of, new and emerging ways of teaching but to me they speak to the goals of most universities’ Mission to, you know, collaboration, creating knowledge, engaging in…
Interviewee: How do I respond to that…? Well I think that the university – if the university had more available resources, particularly financial resources, there are people that can move these things forward. And, for instance, there is a Teaching and Learning Centre and they’re offering amazing workshops that usually just one or two or three people attend. Or there is the Institute for the Study and Learning of Disciplines and now I’m actually, this semester, I’m doing the university certificate in teaching and learning at [institution name] which is amazing and has helped me see teaching and learning in new ways and how it should be learning and teaching, and how we’re all learners. And I think with this long winded answer I forgot what I started saying.
Interviewer: No, it’s okay, I appreciate – I know it’s a tough question, how does open facilitate engaging the world? How does what you’re doing help achieve that mission?
Interviewee: Well I can think of a variety of ways. First of all, thanks to the actual field that I’m teaching, I bring all of these examples, and case studies, and best practises from my studies all over the world and honestly I’ve had students who are international students and they’re not aware of things and places in the lower mainland, or in BC, or in Canada, and at the same time as most of my students are Canadians – I would say about two-thirds – they lack basic understanding or they do not have the information about what’s happening in the rest of the world, in cities elsewhere outside North America.
So I think that this is a major component of engaging students here, university here, and the world. And I like to use a metaphor that my course and my entire Learning and Teaching context is like a jigsaw puzzle because it brings all of these pieces together, or aspires to do so, so the students can see the big picture and this is not just learning about what’s happening elsewhere but it’s about also engaging them with the community and with the world. It’s about what I want them to be able to do when they finish this course is to read about something that’s happening elsewhere, about let’s say the water shortage in Cape Town and be able to look for other resources, to analyze this issue, and ultimately to suggest solutions, but to be engaged with that. To be engaged in keep on learning, and engaged in examining, analyzing, and solving problems. 
And I believe that through that we also engage the world because what I try to do a lot is not talking about Vancouver all the time. I think that would be just about one third or even less of the examples I bring in class, and I encourage students to go to websites of other municipalities around the world, and organizations and find information. And I think that such process has them a lot engaged in…engaged for the long term, not just in the course. So I think that contributes at least a little bit to that tagline. 
Interviewer: I agree. I certainly do. You kind of touched on it. I was wondering if you could also further reflect on your own teaching philosophy and how it relates to what you’re doing.
Interviewee: That’s interesting because yesterday I submitted my teaching philosophy to the instructors of the certificate program here because these past few months it’s the first time I actually sat down and wrote a teaching philosophy, it’s not just random thoughts in my mind. 
I think I’ll – yeah I’ve already said bits and pieces, but the main thing is this metaphor of the jigsaw puzzle and one more metaphor: casting a stone in the water and having a ripple effect. And this is what I’ve always wanted to do and this is what reflects in my teaching philosophy. I want my students to be lifelong learners. I want to take things they cannot just apply in their professional…in their work, but things they can also apply in their lives. Things that they can – and ideas and skills that they can take with them and they can spread and engage other people as well. I think that’s the gist of my teaching philosophy. 
Interviewer: I appreciate that. It’s so funny that you were just writing it yesterday. I had to write one last week, so it’s all fresh for me, too. 
Interviewee: Which is a good exercise, I think. 
Interviewer: It sure is. 
And we’ve touched on it, and you’ve mentioned it. I just want to give you on last chance to say. How does this result in meaningful learning for our students?
Interviewee: That’s funny because that’s the reading that I have for this Friday that I was reading this morning with which I don’t really agree. The way I see it, students shouldn’t be in the university just to get grades and just to get a degree and apply for a job afterwards, and this reflects in my courses and in my teaching, because my focus is not on grades. My focus is not on being strict with assignments, and marking, and deadlines, and I don’t know what. But I’m more into formative assessments so that there is constant feedback, there’s constant collaboration, and there is additional skills of learning. It’s partly because it’s the nature of the field. You cannot just work on sustainability and, you know, know a very specific part of it. You have to have many skills, even if you’re just a sustainability data analyst, let’s say, which is specific as a job description, but it takes more than that. It takes analysis skills, systems thinking skills, interdisciplinary skills, on top of data analysis and research. So what I’m trying to do is help them develop a set of skills, even skills that sometimes I haven’t thought about and they just come up and I have students who, for instance, last winter a student emailed me a couple of months after the course ended and she went back to Spain to her home country and she works in the Sustainability department in the headquarters and I thought, “oh that’s good! She pursued something that she wanted to.” And other students continued their Master’s in the field because they felt strong, confident, and motivated enough after my course. But again this is also attributable to the actual field. It’s multi-skilled. 
Interviewer: Are there any further things that you want to mention or things that you’ve thought I was going to ask that you’d like to discuss? 
Interviewee: I don’t know. I don’t think so. 
Interviewer: Okay. That’s all of the questions I had for you. I really appreciate you taking the time and reflecting on your practise. I really appreciate your insights. 
Interviewee: It has been very interesting and thank you for the opportunity. By thinking about this interview, it helped me bring some bits and pieces of thoughts together, as well. So, I’m glad to help.
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m fortunate that many people doing this sort of work are very also open to sharing why and what they do. And it’s been interesting that I often wonder: does this only work in a certain discipline? But I’ve spoken to people from a variety of disciplines and the message is the same. They’re trying to engage students with the Information Age, or trying to engage openly in the knowledge society. So it’s quite interesting. 
Interviewee: Yeah, I met a few months ago an instructor from Health Sciences and what she wanted to was she was using Open resources but her main thing – her main goal – was to improve students’ research…research thinking, not just research skills. So it’s something that I hadn’t thought of until then, until I discussed that with her that yeah, we’re doing that too. And she’s in a totally different field. I would expect her to use specific resources but no, because she wants to show students how there’s so much information that’s good information out there, how to distinguish it from the bad information, and she’s using OER to do that. And it’s totally a different field. So that’s good. 
Interviewer: Excellent. Well, I want to thank you again for your time. It was really a pleasure to talk with you. And thanks for sharing so openly about your practise. 
Interviewee: The pleasure’s all mine. And good luck with your research! 
Interviewer: I appreciate it. Likewise. I don’t know if I can help in your research in any way, but I’d be happy to if something comes up. 
Interviewee: Well if you know somebody in the municipality of Victoria and I can work with them. 
Interviewer: I don’t know, but I’ll keep my eyes open. I will follow up with the transcript and a prompt for the idea of Open data if you’re into that. Also, I’m fortunate to be able to offer you a $20 gift card to Chapters for taking part in the interview, so I’ll send that shortly as well. 
Interviewee: Oh, I hadn’t noticed that part. Was that in the email?
Interviewer: Yeah, it was in the consent form. 
Interviewee: Oh, okay. 
Interviewer: If anything else comes to mind, don’t hesitate to reach out to me. I’m going to be working on this for a while. 
Interviewee: I will. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: Thank you. Nice to meet you. 
Interviewer: Likewise. Have a great day!
Interviewee: Thank you, you too. Bye.


Interview 008 March 28, 2018 – An Interview with Hannah McGregor who consented to being named in the research
Interviewer: Okay…so if I could get you to consent to your participation in this study?
Interviewee: Yeah…yes…yes I do. 
Interviewer: Okay. So there’s – I don’t know if you noticed on the consent form there was an additional option for open data transcripts. 
Interviewee: Mhm.
Interviewer: I realize that’s probably not a decision you’re ready to make right now so when I have the transcript ready, I’ll send it to you and I’ll prompt you then to make a choice if you’re willing to have the transcript as an open data project.
Interviewee: Okay. Yeah, in general I’m a podcaster. That’s my primary form of public scholarship. So generally I’m pretty comfortable with the things I say recorded and then released publicly. 
Interviewer: Fair enough. 
Interviewee: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of podcasting do you do?
Interviewee: I make a feminist Harry Potter fan podcast with a colleague of mine at [institution name].
Interviewer: Oh, wonderful. 
Interviewee: Which is how we got started, and then I make a podcast by myself called “Secret Feminist Agenda.”
Interviewer: Cool!
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: Okay I’m going to start with some demographic information and then we’ll talk more about some of the teaching that you’re doing. 
Interviewee: Mhm.
Interviewer: Are you willing to identify your age?
Interviewee: Yeah, I’m thirty-three.
Interviewer: Are you willing to identify your gender?
Interviewee: Yup, female. 
Interviewer: Are you willing to identify ethnicity or other ways you contribute to diversity in society?
Interviewee: I am white and I am queer. 
Interviewer: Okay. Can you identify your role or job title at SFU?
Interviewee: I’m an assistant professor in the publishing department. 
Interviewer: It’s a publishing department then?
Interviewee: It’s a program, I believe, is its official status in the institution, yeah. 
Interviewer: Is it within a faculty there?
Interviewee: It’s in the Faculty of Communication, Art, and Technology. 
Interviewer: Great. And your subject area or speciality?
Interviewee: My areas are: I’m a Canadian literature scholar by training. And my areas here are publishing history, as well as, sort of, new media studies. 
Interviewer: Cool. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: And would you comment on your employment configuration? Are you sessional versus a tenure track?
Interviewee: I’m tenure track. 
Interviewer: Tenure track. And is it teaching or research focused?
Interviewee: It’s a research faculty appointment. So, the standard division. The, sort of, 40/40/20 teaching/research/service.
Interviewer: How many years have you been teaching?
Interviewee: I’ve been in this position, this is my second year. I was a full-time sessional for one year prior to this, and then I was a post-doc for two years prior to that, so I taught here during my post-doc and during my PhD, but very little. I think a total of three or four courses. And then seven courses during the year that I sessional-ed full-time, and then I think I’ve taught six courses, six or seven courses, in my time here. 
Interviewer: Okay.
Interviewee: It was a long answer, but you know, it’s like I guess I’ve been teaching for, like, seven years, but for three of those years I taught one course a year, so…
Interviewer: Well then there’s the next question, and how about outside higher Ed, did you teach in any other contexts?
Interviewee: My only other teaching experience is that I was in fact a piano teacher when I was a teenager. 
Interviewer: Ah, okay. But that’s relevant for sure. 
Okay so now we’re going to talk about the idea of open educational practises which I framed in the study. Do you have a sense of what I’m talking about? Or do you have your own understanding of that term “Open Educational Practise?”
Interviewee: Yeah I think I became familiar with first, sort of, the actual work on that, sort of, like Audrey Watters’ work on Open Education when I started my job here. So the Publishing program really holds Open Education close to its heart. One of the core courses that we offer – we’re an Undergraduate minor program – one of the core courses we offer the, Publishing 101, is sort of based off the domain of “One’s Own” model where we have students acquire, through Reclaim Hosting, acquire a URL of their own and build up their own website. And we, sort of, think of that as like the flagship course of our undergraduate minor and that’s the first course that I taught when I got here, I co-taught it with [colleague name], our department head. And, sort of, the focus of that – we read a lot of people like Watters and talked with our students a lot about the premise of open pedagogy and why we think it’s important that their work be public and the way in which we think that adds more value to their work and, sort of, conceives of their work as having an audience beyond us as their professors. 
So that is very much, sort of, the ethos of the department and that has become more actively a part of my teaching since I started here. But I did…when I was at the [institution], I was already working in the Digital Humanities, so I very frequently incorporated project options into my courses – and I was in an English department there – so I very frequently incorporated project options into my courses where students could do something like make a podcast, build a website, but we, sort of, conceived less overtly in terms of the publicness and more in terms of just thinking of alternative modes of knowledge production within an English department.
And that in itself was inspired both by my Digital Humanities background where that’s a big part of DH pedagogy, but also by the [institution] takes very seriously community service learning. I did a fair amount of community service learning options in my courses which is at the [institution] it’s actually a program, like there’s actual staff employed by the university whose job it is to pair instructors up with community organizations, to help students find placements for the work that they’ll be doing is work for a community organization that then counts as a credit towards their classes. So that’s also a key part of starting to think about incorporating more Open practises into my classroom because that work is by definition Open because it’s taking students outside of the classroom. 
Interviewer: Certainly, yeah. 
There’s a whole bunch of things I wanted to circle into on that. This is going back to the start where you talked about the domain of one’s one. So they’re getting going with that in their first year starting up their own domain? 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: How do they respond to that?
Interviewee: It’s really interesting. I can’t say for sure if this is a generational shift, but anecdotally I feel like students today are more afraid of building their own domains than what I experienced when I was 18 or 19 when that was a very standard practise and most of us had, like, twenty failed blogs. Like, I mean if you go into my WordPress account there is a hilarious trail of failed blog ideas. Just like, they’re there for the discovering and each is sillier than the last. But they’re very, very used to producing huge amounts of content for social media platforms which deliberately frame what they’re doing as not knowledge production. And when you ask them to do almost exactly the same thing on a domain that has their name, or their identity, or their personally, sort of structuring it, it seems for a lot of them to become really intimidating and decisions around, like, “What is this going to look like? How do you want to project yourself out into the world? What are your goals? What kind of role are you taking? Is this going to be anonymous? Is this going to have your name?” Those questions for a lot of students seem to be pretty viscerally scary which I find really interesting. 
Interviewer: It is interesting because with social media you’re, sort of, asked for a specific type of content in a specific package as it were and then if you’ve got your own domain, you can package it any way you want and then it could be as long as a manuscript or as short as a single –
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: It’s kind of interesting.
Interviewee: And I think having your own domain implies value to the work that you’re creating, it says like “your words matter enough that you should think about the thought that they’re in and the design decisions you’re going to make, and that is the opposite of the messaging that you get from social media which all says that, like, “you’re just…” platforms like Facebook are invested in devaluing your ideas and your words so that you’ll believe that you should give them away for free and that’s communicated to you via the platform on all kinds of levels, right? And so trying to shift students out of that mindset into, sort of, valuing their work and their ideas in a different way I think is maybe unsurprisingly intimidating for them. 
These are sweeping generalizations about students as if they are a holistic group of – because there are lots of students who are super into it or already have websites. 
Interviewer: Yeah I think it’s an area itself for study. And part of my research does do work with students, I’m trying to do a three paper thesis, so the third paper is focused on, sort of, the literacies of students’ readiness for this sort of activity. 
Interviewee: Yeah. I have this written on my whiteboard is this paper that I will never ever, ever write. It’s just the phrase “platform literacy education in digital natives.” I had this idea that platform literacy is where I see students struggle the most. Which is to say their actual understanding of how the platforms they’re interacting with function, the way that they use their information, the way that they frame their interactions. That actually ties into – we can talk about that with my use of OJS because grappling with the platform was the single largest barrier for students. Unfamiliar platforms just seem to cause a great deal of panic. 
Interviewer: Yeah it’s a concern, obviously. I can hear from what you’re saying the links to the curriculum in a publishing program. But then there’s all the literacies of working through the platforms as you say, which for any discipline are big issues because we want students to engage more openly, have peer review happening, have community engagement happening, but it’s where do we build in the time to get them ready for these environments?
Interviewee: Yeah and what do you have to pull out of the course in order to build in that time, right? I teach – I mean I’m sure we’ll get more into this – but the course that I taught last semester is the structure of the book publishing industry in Canada, which I’m supposed to be teaching them the history of the Massey Commission, how the industry works, how it frames publishing, what the grant structures are. Like, there’s content in that course. So figuring out how to layer in content as well as these, sort of, the skills acquisition necessary to do the kinds of assignments that I want to push them to do. That’s a significant load for an undergraduate course.
Interviewer: Just one question on the domain of one’s own project. So you have an arrangement with that organization, and do the students pay to get a domain? Or is it built into their program?
Interviewee: The students pay. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Interviewee: Yeah, so that is the, sort of, only fee. We don’t have – most of our publishing courses don’t have textbooks, for the most part we keep all of the readings free and open. And so we do have them pay for the domain and then they’re free to just let it lapse after a year if that’s what they want to do. 
Interviewer: And they go exclusively through Domain of One’s Own, or can they go to any hosting?
Interviewee: We have them do Reclaim Hosting because it’s easier for us to manage if they’re all going through the same system. And we’re teaching them how to use that platform as well, so they buy a domain through Reclaim and then they put a WordPress on it and then we move from there. 
The other really nice part of doing it through Reclaim – it’s not particularly – we don’t have an arrangement with them we just send our students to their site to buy their domains, but because Reclaim Hosting is run out of the university, they’re used to particular kinds of problems that students encounter and are very prompt with helping students if they run into problems. 
Interviewer: Okay, excellent. 
So why don’t you tell me more about the project you had going last year with OJS?
Interviewee: Yeah, so this was fall 2017, I was teaching a third year publishing course. This was the Structure of the Book Publishing Industry in Canada. [colleague name]approached me – I think it was actually [colleague name] who was our Liaison Librarian for Publishing for a while – was talking to [colleague name] about his interest in finding more classes that would partner with the library to do – to use the OJS system to publish student work. And so [colleague name] put us in touch and I thought it made sense for this course – I didn’t want to just plug it into a course where it didn’t fit. It made sense to me for a course that was thinking about publishing as an industry and publishing as a set of structures and that particularly one of the key, sort of, knowledge based learning outcomes of the course is for students to understand the degree to which publishing is expensive and labour intensive because that is something when you, sort of, present students with a problem of the Canadian publishing industry – the problem being we don’t have a large enough market to create a viable and sustainable independent publishing industry and so we need federal grants to keep it going – when you present students with that problem, they’re like ,”oh why don’t authors just self-publish then?” 
And so I was like, “this will be a great addition because it will show students in a very visceral way how serious publishing is a series of steps, it’s time consuming, it’s labour intensive, it’s nowhere near as easy they might be imagining it is.” And in that sense, I think it has a lot of potential. So I made it the platform for their final essays, rather their final projects, because another key goal that [colleague name] had was to create a collection that demonstrated that OJS can host any manner of content. That it doesn’t need to be just essays. And so I gave students absolute free reign in terms of what kind of a thing they produced. Some opted for essays still, but other students created digital timelines, infographics, podcasts, comic books, videos, and so part of the point was that whatever we created could still fit into the OJS platform. And I sort of structured the assignment, like scaffolded the assignment, such that they were submitting drafts through OJS, peer reviewing one another’s drafts, sort of working through the revision process. 
A couple of things went awry from a learning perspective that I’m going to do it again next year, and so it’s just, sort of, like, things to note. One is that [colleague name] very generously because we were just really tight on time for turning around the drafts, so [colleague name] did all of the formatting and, sort of, producing basically ingesting and then, sort of, standardizing…and that I think still produced for the students a bit of a sense of, like, “oh it’s magic. You just plug content in and something beautiful comes out at the end and we all feel very pleased with ourselves.” So I think even that very small loss of their participation I think still ran the risk of reproducing exactly the impression I was trying really hard to lead them away from which is: publishing is easy and it just kind of happens. 
And the other thing is I think that I didn’t pull back the other content of the course enough to make space for the kinds of stress that would be caused by the unfamiliarity of the platform. I didn’t anticipate how much time they would need to grapple with the platform, how frequently they would make mistakes. They did things like they didn’t understand that they needed to resubmit the paper as a different file on the same submission after the review. So they created new submissions. So then all of sudden we had, like, thirty duplicate submissions. All of just these little things that just I hadn’t – because I’ve been using OJS for years I just hadn’t anticipated the degree to which it would be baffling. And I think counter to the many enthusiastic claims that are frequently made in essays about Open Education, I think the overall quality of the projects was lower as a result. I think that they produced work that was not as good as work they could have produced had they not been spending time grappling with an unfamiliar platform. 
So I need to figure out how to – I mean that’s a course design problem. That’s not a ‘them’ problem that’s a ‘me’ problem. So I need to – my challenge for next year is to figure out how to structure that project more seamlessly into the course so that they have more time and space to be working through those problems as the course progresses. 
Interviewer: Yeah, OJS is kind of unique and I remember the first time I interacted with it. I was like, “okay…” it took a while to just orient myself. “Okay am I an author, a reviewer…?” And I do take on all those roles I suppose, I guess that’s why I use it. So they will be an author, and they will be a reviewer and they will do different things in those roles. 
So we did a project, it was kind of similar, but we just used a WordPress site and we did the peer review more offline, I guess, or you know, someone would get access to a piece of draft content and then provide some peer review. Students still struggle with the unfamiliar of the system, but yeah, it does become a challenge.
Interviewee: Yeah I’m having an interestingly different experience this semester with a fourth year course on publishing and social change where the students have a final group project that is a publishing project with a social change, which is again, I do this with all of my students I always have a final project that is format agnostic. So I tell them what my goals are, what I want them to accomplish but I don’t tell them what they actually have to do. So two of the groups are making podcasts, one group is doing a photo history project, and one is doing a poster project. And all of those just part of what they all have to do is figure out how the things is going to be published and circulated. And by making that their problem, like they’re engaging it more seriously, and solving the problems themselves or coming to me for help, but understanding that because it was folded so explicitly into the assignment, they understand that as what their job is. So, like, figure out how to publish this thing. And there is something about the way…there’s something about the OJS platform, and I can’t really put my finger on it. But it clearly read to them as not their problem. It read to them as the platform’s problem if things weren’t working, rather than their challenge as people learning to publish. So it’s thinking about – and I think that’s in part, sort of, their familiarity with platforms like Canvas which is what we use at SFU which are framed for them as, sort of, tools that should disappear in their usefulness. Tools that their only job is to be as seamless as possible. And so a tool that doesn’t feel seamless feels like a problem rather than a task. 
Interviewer: Yeah, Canvas – I’m just thinking out loud – is, I mean in our context the learning management system supports the course and then it goes away. It’s sort of temporal, and it’s useful but there’s no way to get everything out at once. You don’t have a lot of control over what’s there and how you can access it. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: So you think – I mean there are differences. The OJS volume that you’ve built lives on. Those students that are in second year can look back on it. Do you think there’s value for them? Or have you heard any feedback from them? Or are they still interacting with it in some way? Do you know? 
Interviewee: I don’t know if there’s value for them. I don’t know if they will ever…I don’t think it’s been long enough, than you know, two months, since that course was taught. So it’s hard to say. We certainly had in our Master of Publishing program in one of the courses the students have to write a series of short essays as blog posts on the Unpub Blog. And we, not only have we had students come back and look for those, we recently had an email from a student saying “Oh I want to get my essay. I’m using it for a portfolio. I couldn’t figure out where it was.” So we know students are going back and finding those. But I actually, because the graduates students are writing essays on new areas, I end up having my undergrad students quoting those essays that they find independently when researching topics because it’s often the most up to date work on a particular field in publishing which is, like, a great example of how doing your research in public, it immediately becomes usable. I feel like that is more applicable at the graduate level because students are at the stage at that point where they’re producing stuff that can be usable for other people. I don’t think in a third year course most students are there in terms of producing research that other people – that is citable by other people. And that’s fine. They’re still learning to produce stuff. I suspect this semester the students will produce work in their Publishing and Social Change course, students will produce work they’re more likely to go back to and that is because I let them choose a topic that they were personally invested in and many of them – so they’re producing work that they believe in and several of them have spoken about their intentions to, sort of, continue this project outside of the course and to, sort of, use it to start building their profiles as professionals. Whereas in the Structure of the Book Publishing Industry in Canada, it’s very hard to come up with a topic that students feel passionate about. It’s like, “oh policy!”
Interviewer: Right. That’s really fascinating that undergrads are finding graduate work because it’s exposed and because it’s the most current and fresh research, finding it useful. Do you know if the grad students are knowing that their work is being used?
Interviewee: I really doubt it. Yeah and I don’t think that they would have any way to know that other than me telling them. 
Interviewer: It certainly opens up opportunities for undergraduate students to say, “Wow that graduate student’s doing some interesting work I’m going to try to contact them, reach out to them, bring them in for a guest lecture, or just have a conversation. That’s a nice, kind of, story to tell around just being more Open among students. So often the cohorts just go together and you don’t know what’s going on in third year when you’re in first year, per se. 
Interviewee: Yeah and our Master’s program and our undergrad are very separated. I think I mentioned before we just offer a minor at the undergraduate level, so they’re not Publishing students and don’t think of themselves as Publishing students. Only a few end up really sort of participating in the life of the department in those ways, and often those students end up applying for the Master’s program themselves. 
Interviewer: Right.
Interviewee: Yeah.
Interviewer: Would you say there was, like, a catalyst, a moment, a person, that kind of shifted your ideals in teaching towards these more Open approaches?
Interviewee: That is a super good question. I think the first course that I took as a graduate student that modelled to me different ways of going about both teaching and the kinds of stuff you could assign was [colleague name] Digital Textualities course at the University of Guelph. Which was early on in my learning about Digital Humanities where I sort of was exposed first hand to the degree which DH pedagogy just looks really, really, really different from what you’re doing in most other English graduate seminars. 
I’m trying to think of like what actually led me to…I think the other – like I think I started to sort of learn more about what DH pedagogy was like and what other people were doing in their classes, and then my colleague who’s also a DH guy, he was a PhD student when I was a post-doc, [colleague name], he taught his first course and made it an entirely Open and entirely community oriented course. I was like, “oh you can just do that?” Like, I think, I mean for the most part we’re never taught how to teach, so for the most part what I learned about what you can do in classrooms came from watching my colleagues do things and being like, “Oh you didn’t get – I thought we had to assign essays?” I just kind of had the impression we had to assign essays because literally that’s all anyone ever does. And then I checked and it turns out there’s no rule saying you have to assign essays. We’re all just doing that because we have some vague shared idea that they’re useful. I’m not convinced they’re useful. They’re really a terrible way to teach anybody to do anything beyond write the essay which unless you go into grad school, you will never use again. 
One of my favourite things about the Publishing department is that explicitly nobody here cares about me making my students write essays. It’s really freeing. And then I don’t have to grade essays! Which is the greatest thing in the world. 
Interviewer: So you’ve got a really Open culture there, it sounds, in the department. And that can make a difference as you say. Like, if you come into an institution, it’s formal, it’s structured, you’ve got your own experience that you’ve come through. The classroom looks certain ways. There’s a chalkboard, the rows are all facing, those physical structures in the classroom can determine how you conduct and do your work. 
Interviewee: Very much so, yup. Yeah, and the other thing is it’s not just coming from us as instructors. Or rather, it’s sort of cyclical because it comes, like…we get cohorts full of students who have been taught how to behave in a classroom before we ever get them in our classrooms. And that behaviour is sit quietly while I talk at you and often by the time I get them, because mostly I teach third and fourth years, so often by the time I get them that has been reinforced for years as positive classroom behaviour and the easiest –the path of least resistance for me would be to do exactly the same thing. To assign them things that they’re familiar with that make them feel comfortable, to run my classroom in the way that they’re used to classrooms being run. That would all be the easiest thing to do. I think a lot of people do that – I don’t think a lot of people are doing it because they’re lazy or don’t care, I think a lot of people are doing it because we are overworked. And because a lot of teachers are Sessionals and asking them to do innovative pedagogy when they’re already, you know, when I was teaching three courses a semester I thought I was going to die and lots of people teach more than that. It’s wild…yeah, so you’re actually do a lot of – it is a lot of work to create a classroom in which people are willing to go with you and do things differently. You can’t just be like, “I’m going to tear up the syllabus in front of you! Now we’re going off road.” That’s terrifying because students need – are also super overworked and exhausted and need really clear structures and need really clear outcomes and there’s a certain amount of, sort of, opening up those structures you can do but you have to do it in really careful and deliberate ways. Like, I have to do a lot of…I get a lot of informal student feedback throughout the semester as a way of, like, making sure – I often have students do, you know, some form of writing or check-in weekly to be like, “Okay. How are you doing? Are you confused now? Are you overwhelmed? Is this terrifying? What can we do?”
Interviewer: Yeah, I think as you were talking I was also thinking about the student who just wants the essay. Who just wants the thing that they know how to do that they’ve been trained to do over the years of courses that have been in the traditional format. And I know for some Sessionals, it’s like, “Well…” You know, I teach sessionally, and I don’t want to rock the boat too much because then it’ll affect my performance reviews, or students will just say, “Oh it’s unclear what this professor wants.”
So, for example, your flexible assignments – could be an essay, could be a video, could be a podcast – do students, are they like, “Well should the podcast be as long as the paper? How does the paper compare to the timeline?”
Interviewee: Yes. Oh yeah. Last semester I got all of those questions. “How long should a podcast be?” I don’t know. That’s why I keep being… “if I gave you a number, it would be arbitrary. Do you want me to invent a number for you right now?” And sometimes they’re like, “yes please.” “Okay. Fifteen minutes? I don’t know!” Like…but they do the same thing with essay length: “How long should our essays be?” And I’m just like, “I don’t know that either.” Um…and I don’t get, like, they don’t get mad at me. They don’t, like, my evaluations are good and I think it’s because of the lots and lots and lots and lots of check-ins. I think that is really one of the keys which is impossible to do if you’re teaching five hundred students in a semester. Like, I have the luxury of doing that because I have maybe sixty students a semester so I can know all of their names and check in with them regularly and consult with them individually on their projects and work through these questions with them. Like, I have that time. I have that head space for them. And that means that we can, sort of, you know go off rails a bit. That would be so unbelievably unfeasible with five hundred students, and that’s not a hyperbolic number. That is how many students a semester a lot of my friends teach. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I realize. 
Okay, I’m going to shift gears into, again, some of the structures of the organization. I just wanted to – you’ve mentioned the library and some people helping with OJS. Are there other facilities or infrastructure or people or space or buildings that you use to do this work?
Interviewee: For Pub101 it helps that we have access to a lab so we can do lab space with our – students do lab space. Wow, lab time. We have lab classes for that course. And I think that’s really necessary. A lot of the time – you know, you can’t assume students’ access to technology, and so having that like, “we’re all going to sit down at identical computers and work through this together in this space” I think is really necessary. You know, it’s a challenge when I get up to third and fourth year courses where we don’t – those courses are not booked any lab time. And then I’m, sort of, students are falling back on what they have access to. So that poses a problem. I rely very heavily on the library. And then, you know, when I am partnering, I am using resources, you know, like, when we’re using Reclaim Hosting, we’re also relying on the people who run Reclaim Hosting who are also university employees. Or I use Hypothesis in most of my classes and the guys who run Hypothesis like send me an email at the end of the semester like, “How did it go? Do you have any feedback for us?” So when you’re using these Open tools, you’re often, sort of, also in conversation with people who built the tools as well. 
Interviewer: Do you also use Canvas in combination with these other tools as sort of a home base? 
Interviewee: I do. I didn’t when I started teaching here. In part because our department head doesn’t like it, so he doesn’t use it, and my first courses that I taught I was co-teaching with him. So I was like, “Oh okay I guess we don’t use Canvas here” and it took me a little while as a new instructor to, sort of – I was a new instructor in this department – to, sort of, get comfortable being like, “actually I know that that’s not what you do, but I like Canvas. I find it really helpful.” So I’m back on board with Canvas. I do use it as sort of the central space for, you know, where the syllabus will be, where the assignments are, where the students get their grades. All of that stuff is, sort of, happening through Canvas. 
Interviewer: Your core class list if you needed to contact them and such?
Interviewee: Exactly. 
Interviewer: And how do you…you’ve spoken about your departmental culture, but how do you feel this work aligns with the norms of the institution? You can talk about the department, the faculty, or the organizational context as you wish. 
Interviewee: I think SFU, sort of, self-branding is as the engaged university, I think it’s one of the primary goals of this institution to be community engaged. So I think experimental and public pedagogy in particular align very well with the kind of work SFU wants to do as well. I don’t think it’s a coincidence that OJS – that the public knowledge project is located here. I think it aligns very strongly with the primary goals of the project. I know my colleague [colleague name] very frequently is called upon because his work is all about public – you know, he works for the public knowledge project. And he’s very frequently called upon by the university to sort of profile his research as exemplary of the kind of stuff SFU values. So I think that in that way it’s very much in keeping with what the institution wants. 
Interviewer: And the work that you get students to do, I mean you talked before about some of it being community service learning. So some of the artifacts they’re creating are a result of the work they’re doing in the community? 
Interviewee: Yeah, the course I’m teaching right now, the Publishing and Social Change course is the first community oriented course I’ve done since I’ve relocated to SFU. It’s a little harder here because there isn’t a dedicated community service learning program. Like, there aren’t staff who are running a program and so there’s nobody that I could, sort of, go to to facilitate those student relationships. So I had the students form the relationships themselves. And only one of the groups opted to explicitly go in that direction which is to say that they were interested in food security in Vancouver, they sought out a local organization and are partnering with them to make a podcast that, sort of, profiles the work that they do. The other three groups are, sort of, doing their own thing that isn’t explicitly working with a community organization. Because if I wanted to make that a requirement I would have to be tracking down those organizations, communicating with them, convincing them to work with the university, facilitating the relationship. That was all stuff that the staff who managed it at the [institution]…it’s a significant addition to labour. 
Interviewer: Absolutely. But those sorts of things are in the Mission, Vision, and Values of the university, of almost every university. 
Interviewee: Yeah, I’m surprised not more…yeah. I’m surprised…at the [institution], I just, kind of, got the impression that all universities did and then I was surprised when I relocated here and it was not the case. 
Interviewer: Can you reflect on your own teaching philosophy and how it may be related to this sort of work?
Interviewee: Yeah, very early on, sort of, before I started doing this kind of work I was really interested in a lot of my research is sort of feminist and anti-oppressive oriented work, so I was very interested in creating a classroom space that was…I mean that was a feminist and non-oppressive space. I joke very frequently that my primary pedagogy is a pedagogy of not traumatizing my students. Which is honestly a lot of work inside the university because the university is primarily a trauma machine. And so that includes all kinds of things like a policy of being really reasonable about extensions. That’s a very important policy for me. Like, a policy of, you know, particular kinds of classroom management around potentially traumatizing or re-traumatizing conversations. So I think that ethos right from the get-go meant all kinds of things about decentring my own authority in the classroom, believing that students have forms of expertise and forms of knowledge that often extend beyond my own, particularly when we’re talking about issues like race politics in Canada. Like, I am a white woman. I am often teaching in classrooms that are full of people of colour and Indigenous people who have backgrounds and experiences I do not have. And it is my job to cede my authority to their – to what they know that I do not know. And so ceding authority was a very important part of my pedagogy from early on and I think that that lends itself very well to, sort of, Open models of pedagogy that are about, sort of, the classrooms being a collaborative space where we are thinking things through and arriving at ideas together and it is not about me creating arbitrary rules and structures. It’s about me being transparent about what my goals are and the way I’m running things and the decisions that I’m making, and then being willing to let those goals shift, depending on what that particular classroom as a community ends up needing. Yeah, so I think, sort of, the feminism came first which is usually the case for most things with me, and then the, sort of, Open pedagogy followed. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I think you’ve also talked about personalized…allowing students to set their own personalized learning goals, making sure that those are visible to other students so that they can form networks. How do you – 
Interviewee: Yeah I do – sorry.
Interviewer: You go ahead. 
Interviewee: I was just going to say, I do a student survey at the beginning of every course. I ask them things like, you know, what name they want me to call, what pronouns they use, if they have any accommodations they need that aren’t, like, official. But I also ask them to tell me what their goal for the course is. That cannot be a grade. And then at the end of the course I have them look back at that. I’m trying a new technology in my fourth year class right now. I don’t know if you remember these…?
Interviewer: Oh, workbooks?
Interviewee: Yeah. We’re using workbooks because I found the internet was adding an unnecessary layer of complexity. So they do informal responses or in class writing in their work books and I collect them at the end of every class. Anyway, so they did their surveys there and at the end of semester I have them re-read what their goals were and reflect on, you know, whether or not those goals stayed the same and the degree to which they accomplished them. Which is a way of trying to actually, like, not just theoretically invite them to set their own goals, but have them literally tell me, like, “what do you think you want to get out of this course?”
Interviewer: Excellent. Finally, are there any other things you want to mention, or things you thought I would ask but I haven’t? 
Interviewee: Hmm…I think – I feel like I hit this already, but I think I do want to come back to, like…I would not be doing any Open pedagogy of any kind of other members of the university community hadn’t invited me to do so. Which is to say that, like, it came from community service learning at the [institution], and it comes from the library here, and it’s almost entirely been driven by, sort of, invitations to experiment, or invitations to collaborate that came from those people. And that is in part because I don’t know if I would have known those resources existed otherwise but also because it is too much work to take on as a single person to, sort of, reinvent the wheel. I think those partnerships have been really, really key. 
Interviewer: Wonderful. I think there’s also – it sounds from what you’ve said the culture of the unit is also key to that in their willing to give you flexibility in how you teach and not impose any structure of “this is how things are done here.”
Interviewee: That’s what – I can say one other concrete part of the culture here is because it is a small unit, the culture around grade curving is very different. I worked in quite a large unit with a lot of students at the [institution] and there was an expectation that the grades would curve in a particular way. And a by-product of scaffolded Open learning courses is that the students do better, like, the grades are higher because you haven’t made fifty percent of their grade an essay, so they do better and I’ve gotten in a little bit of trouble for that at my previous institution. My grades were too high. Yeah, it’s like, it is not my fault that you are setting up students to fail in order to prove some weird arbitrary things about rigour. None of this is going in the Open transcript! But not having that culture, not having that pressure here, really opens up the possibilities for what I can do. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I had the same experience. My grades were too high and I said, “But look at the work they did! This is from the heart. They really put their heart into this.” And I couldn’t, you know, I couldn’t discount the work just to maintain the bell curve. 
Interviewee: And a lot of the time that bell curve comes from international students, particularly in English classes. So you, like, relying on students whose English is not good to either fail or do very poorly to pull your curve into the right shape. And when you give them interesting scaffolds and digital assignments, all of a sudden that isn’t the same barrier to them and they can do well, which shouldn’t be a problem!
Interviewer: Yeah, I agree. 
Interviewee: Anyway. 
Interviewer: Well, I really want to thank you. I really enjoyed this, it’s wonderful to hear about your work. It’s exciting and kudos to you for the work that you’re doing. And I really appreciate you taking the time to participate. I’m able to offer you a small thank you for your time spent here in the interview that I’ll send along. It’s just a small gift card for Indigo/Chapters.
Interviewee: Delightful. I love books. 
Interviewer: Good. I’ll let you get along with your day. If anything else comes to mind, you have my email. Don’t hesitate to reach out. 
Interviewee: Alright, sounds good. 
Interviewer: Okay. Thanks again. 
Interviewee: Thank you. Good luck with your research. 
Interviewer: I really appreciate it. Have a good day. 


Interview 010 April 6, 2018
[Note that segments of this interview have been redacted to protect the privacy of the participant]
Interviewer: In terms of consent for participation, since I won’t have a chance to get your consent form back, if I could get your consent on the audio recording?
Interviewee: Yeah, I consent to this interview. 
Interviewer: Great, thank you. So I’m going to ask some, sort of, free form questions just about your teaching practise, really, and what you’re doing with students and engaging them with Open publishing and Open educational practises. If there’s any questions you don’t want to answer we can skip them and if want to end the interview you can end it at any time. The video here is recorded by default but I won’t be using the video as part of the analysis of my research and if you want to turn the video off you’re welcome to do that as well. 
Interviewee: Okay. 
Interviewer: Yeah. So I’ll get started here. Well one thing that I wanted to mention was I don’t know if you noticed on the consent form, there was an option for open data transcription. What that means is that the interview transcript itself could be a piece of Open data that other researchers might interrogate. I’m going to let you think about that. Once I give you the transcript, I think it’s probably better to make the decision at that time. 
Interviewee: Sure. 
Interviewer: Yeah, and if you have any questions about that, just let me know. It’s completely optional. So just some demographics. Are you willing to identify your age?
[Demographic info redacted]
Interviewer: So I’ve kind of framed my study around this idea of Open educational practises. Does that term have any meaning for you?
Interviewee: Yeah, I often think of Open textbooks, obviously. But as well, interacting with the larger community, letting your educational practises interact with the larger community. Or things like MOOCs and online courses of that sort, as well. It’s, sort of – that’s sort of the first things that always come to mind when people talk about it. 
Interviewer: Mhm. And how – or how would you describe your engagement with Open educational practises as part of your practise? 
Interviewee: One of the – I think the main thing would probably be the thing that was thought about when I was recommended to talk to you is the blogging work that I’ve done in my classes with my students for quite a few years. I started doing this…I don’t know, probably 2007 or so, just shortly after I started teaching. And using, you know, Blogger or whatever the old Google wide platform was, and so students would post blogs and they’d be publicly available and they could see each other’s work and potentially interact also with others beyond the institution. So I think that’s probably the main thing that I do. I still tend to use publisher textbooks and materials for various reasons and I’ve never run a big MOOC or anything like that. I wouldn’t be opposed to it but it would be a resource issue. 
Interviewer: Certainly. So tell me about why you made the decision to get students into that sort of activity. 
Interviewee: I’ve always been interesting in Science Communication, SciComm as people tend to call it, and my feeling is that a student coming out of their undergrad should be able to explain a concept in a way that others can understand who are not necessarily as deeply educated in that particular field. So I’ll often tell my students now that they should be able to write about something that interests them in some level of complexity – these are often third and fourth year students so some of the concepts are getting pretty detailed – write in a way where either, you know, one of their parents could understand and appreciate and enjoy reading, or one of their for instance student colleagues in English or something, you know, educated but not a specialist could understand it and make it interesting. Some of the courses I teach are, sort of, inherently very interesting like Animal Behaviour, there’s lots of really cool things that go on there and really weird things we can talk about and students really dig it. And then other courses, you know, it’s a variable interest depending on – I do a required Cell Molecular biology course, which there’s a ton of deep interest there but there’s also a ton of slogging through acronyms and mechanisms and things like that. So trying to get students to think about what it is about what they’re studying that’s relevant to others and then being able to relate it in a way that is approachable by the general public with, you know, people with a reasonable education in the general public. So, twelfth grade level or higher, basically. 
Interviewer: And how have the students responded to that? 
Interviewee: I think that they really like it. I think it’s a change from a typical term paper, for instance, where you know you’re handed a subject and then you put something down on paper, you know, ten or twenty pages later and the Prof goes through it and puts a bunch of red on it and nobody ever looks at it again. I think for the most part they like being able to express themselves this way. One of the things about it, too, is that I’ll often say that this thing has to be around a thousand words give or take, so it’s not a massively long thing and I think they think “well that’s going to be great, this is so short,” but then they also realize that crafting something short and yet informative and effective is more difficult than rambling on for fifteen or twenty pages about something. So I think they like it because it is shorter. I usually let them work in a fairly broad scope normally. So in my Invertebrate Zoology course they get to pick their favourite Invertebrate, whatever that is. They might have to dig around for a bit to find something that’s cool and just go with that. So I don’t say “you’re doing honey bees and you’re doing earth worms, blah blah blah.” You know, they can pick what they want and go with it so that that means that they’re dealing with something that also interests them and it often comes out in their writing because they’re interested. In the Cell Molecular Biology type there’s the – I get lots of posts on aging or on cancer or on things that they or their family members might be experiencing oftentimes and you even sometimes they’ll relate some of their experiences with these various disease type issues or other things and you can tell that they’re really interested and are really taking the opportunity to explore it a little bit deeper. 
Interviewer: Mhm. They – the blog, sort of, medium is a little bit different from paper because a paper you’ve got sort of a formula or a structure. Do you find that they – do they find it difficult? Like some people say “I don’t know how to write for a blog. It’s a different way of writing.” Or…?
Interviewee: I do give them examples of other PsyComm type blogs and I say “look at Scientific American. Read an article there. Or the Local or larger national newspapers there’s articles there that will often relate things.” There’s often science journalists out there who will do that type of stuff and some of them really tend to follow that type of script ultimately I think once they’ve read that type of stuff. I think once they’ve read that type of stuff they sort of get into that type of mode. Then other times you have people that are really creative and do some pretty odd things because there’s the freedom to do that type of thing. I mean, some of them – some of their attempts end up working out well, other ones maybe less well, but they’re being creative and moving. You often see personalities come through as well. I mean, in my big sell of Molecular Biology class to an odd sixty or more students sometimes depending on the year and they’re usually they just got out of – they’re in the beginning of third year so I haven’t really met some of them. But even there you can see these personalities come out and after you get to know them over the next couple of years as they become more senior students and you have smaller classes, you sort of realize that that was their personality in the blogs. Sometimes more serious or more focused on details, sometimes more reflective. Oftentimes they’ll joke around about things, too. So I think it gives them leeway that way and I think that they like that. I think that they are nervous sometimes initially. The nice thing about [institution name] is that it’s a pretty small institution so oftentimes I’ll bump into a student just coming out of – even I have my Invertebrates zoology course is a second year course, so I’ll start with them in second year and then they come through third year and fourth year and I see them repeatedly. So by the time they get to late third year or fourth year they’re like, “Oh here’s the blog project again.” But it might be their second, third, or fourth blog that they’ve done. So at that point, it’s pretty easy to guide them. In the second year course I don’t actually have them publish it online. I give them the option of me publishing it online after they get their mark and then they can tell me and in the summer at some point I’ll post it for them if they want me to do it. In the other courses you actually publish it right into the public web immediately. 
Interviewer: Are you adding them all to a single site for the course? Or are they all having their own individual? 
Interviewee: It’s a single site for the course. [institution name] has its own – everyone who is a [institution name] student or faculty member has their own blog space here. Most people don’t know about it. It would be a little bit too hard to track all of those down, so [colleague name] makes up a specific blog page using a – some Open ed, sort of, WordPress-y thing, I have no idea how he does it. It’s very easy to post stuff. We used to use a straight up WordPress thing and I think a few of the students got a bit intimidated by the technicality of it. This is a heck of a lot easier. This is sort of like a web form that students work their way through and get published in the end and on it goes. 
Interviewer: Are they taking advantage of the fact that it’s being published on the web? Are they using embeds and hyperlinks? Are they taking advantage of some of the affordances of the web in that way?
Interviewee: Yeah, I mean that’s actually part of my marking rubric that they need to include links to useful information or video or other things. This is – so I mean a lot of them are in term paper mode and so they’ll cite “Smith et al., 1998” or whatever it happens to be and then they’ll have a little internet cited section at the end, or that’s what they’re trying to do. And I say, “look what you can do instead is say “Smith” and you put your regular reference there in brackets and say “Smith, 1998” or just hyperlink that to the journal’s abstract page and that’s good enough and it sort of surprises them that I’m okay with that but really all I want to know is what they read and see that it’s a legitimate journal article that they’ve – but yeah, they’ll embed things too. I do a lot of teaching about using – I mean I realize that they could probably get away with a fair amount under Fair Use type rules for embedding and using images and stuff like that but I want them to start thinking about later on in life when they’re out of this sort of Fair Use type of environment, so I enforce a use of creative commons or public domain images in their blog posts and I teach them specifically how to use Google Images or Flickr or various other sites to find out – to find Open access or public domain things and then how to figure out what that Open access license is like and what you need to do. Do you need to actually attribute it? Or is this some sort of straight up you can use it without any attribution? Or are you allowed to manipulate it? You know, those sorts of things. Usually I’ll spend some lecture time going through that type of stuff and sometimes even more than once because I tell them once and then they go and try it out on their own and can’t quite figure it out so we go through it a second time. But I’ve always been pretty – I sort of see that as an important thing, especially when they step out of the university environment that they are careful that they are using correctly attributed and correctly licensed work of others. So that becomes part of the learning process, too. 
Interviewer: Yeah I think it’s a pretty important web literacy now. I find in my context often students are kind of unaware or “What is that? I don’t really get that. I just get the job done.” So it’s interesting that you’ve actually embedded it in the curriculum for biology courses. 
Interviewee: Yeah I think that the ethos these days – I mean we all do it, you see some hilarious thing on Facebook and you just steal it and post it on Twitter or whatever, everyone does that. And I think that that’s the underlying, you know, “since I can do it there I can do it anywhere.” It becomes different once – I mean, arguably it’s even different on things like Twitter. You see a fair amount of image theft and stuff like that to try to boost up follower counts and things of that sort. But you know once you’re really working in a real working environment and posting things that are permanent or semi-permanent you need to be pretty careful about that. And I don’t think – I think that students don’t realize that. And I mean I’m talking about people who are younger than us because even our age group tends to do that as well. It’s just the way the world works these days. 
Interviewer: Have you seen any other, sort of, student benefits to the accessibility of other people’s work? The peer review or are they commenting on each other’s work? Have you seen any of that emerge?
Interviewee: I did early on try to throw into the course syllabus some, you know, commenting – like a mark for commenting participation but I found that it was really hard to monitor that and to apply marks especially in larger classes, figuring out who was commenting on what etc. etc. Comments are still open and sometimes they will comment on each other’s things. I have specific wording in the syllabus to keep your comments respectful and kind. And I’ve never had issues that way. I also have comments, too, about how if you are critiquing a paper you’ve decided – you’re writing a blog post about a particular study and you critique it, keep in mind too that you’re not an expert in this field so your critique may or may not be valid. So be careful in the way that you critique things and especially not to be causing potential liability issues and other things. I do keep track of things as they come in pretty closely. I’ve never really had issues that way, students I think are very aware of what they’re writing. A lot of the stuff that they about write too, some animal behaviour or some obscure species of worm in the Amazon or something like that, is not really susceptible to that type of thing and I understand in other disciplines of course, especially I would expect Humanities but even in some science, situations as well you could certainly go off the rails a lot easier depending on the course. 
Interviewer: Would you be able to identify a catalyst for your move towards perhaps your own more Open practises or your engagement with students? You said in 2007 you kind of moved into this, was there inspiration or a moment that led you to it?
Interviewee: I think one of the reasons was I wanted to get away from term papers. As I said earlier too, I wanted students thinking more about how they relate their work. I think part of the learning process isn’t just necessarily internalizing this stuff, it’s being able to synthesize it and consolidate it in such a way that you can then relay it to other people. Those are the two things that sort of drove me a little bit at that point. And that was sort of just barely after Facebook got going and maybe even pre-Twitter to be honest with you, it was sort of still the main blog era back then. So there was less, sort of, social sharing of that type of stuff happening. So the whole environment has changed and I think generally for the better. We all know that there’s issues. So I was doing a bit of blogging even back then on my own. I still do it reasonably often. This semester has sort of slowed down just because I have three courses I’m teaching. But I like to make sure that I’m doing it as well as an example to the students so they can read my blog post if they’re interested to see how I write as well. I’ve always thought especially – well I think in any academic discipline, but science in particular because it really does affect people’s lives – being able to relate it beyond the academy or behind the lab is an important thing. 
Interviewer: Mhm. So are there other facilities or supports that help you do this work aside from, you know, the software itself? 
Interviewee: Not a ton, to be honest. I mean [colleague name] and the system that he set up is great. Like I said, I initially just started winging it off the corner of my desk. There is not much out there other than the fact that there’s a lot of good examples I guess that I can pass on to the students to look at in terms of how they’re writing. And we talked about creative commons things too, so those sorts of Flickr, Google Images, types of things as well. I mean it’s all stuff that I tend to dig up for the most part. There’s a few other of my entomologist or other biologist type friends that have done these types of things with their courses and we every now and then exchange ideas or syllabi or rubrics or things like that. That happened a lot more when this was, sort of, novel. Like, four or five years ago it really started taking off among teaching situations and things really flew round a lot more back then. I think it’s sort of less novel now so you don’t hear as much about it. 
Interviewer: Are there any ways that you’re being recognized for either your own public scholarly communications or the work that you’re having students do? Which could potentially be connecting the university a little more to the community.
Interviewee: Yeah, I did receive an internal teaching award here about four years ago or so related I think particularly to the blogging work that I do. Often it relates – a lot of it is how technology can be brought into the classroom in an effective way for teaching. I have not – I gave a talk at one point at an entomological conference, it was on a sort of larger issue in general but there was a small little bit in there on student blogging. That would have been back in about 2011. But generally no, there’s not a ton of that going on, to be honest. 
Interviewer: One of the other individuals I spoke with said they work in a very specific discipline and then they started doing this, sort of, innovative stuff in teaching that discipline but there was nowhere for them to talk about it. Like, the conferences were just on – in your case – just about biology. Have you found the discipline and perhaps your community, are they now talking more about innovation in teaching at those sorts of events?
Interviewee: Yeah, to some extent. I don’t think I was necessarily the first person using the blogging exercise at [institution name] but I was definitely among the first. And it has spread and partly because I think word gets out and I’ve co-taught with other instructors as well and they’ve started using that too or other people in my department. Yeah, so I don’t know if I’m answering your question. What was the question again?
23:07
Interviewer: I think it was – I don’t even know if it was a question. I was just hearing a synergy between what I’d heard from someone else that you know you’re in a discipline of biology which is focused on the science but now you’re doing some sort of innovation with teaching and is there a for you to share that among your community of biologists? Or…?
Interviewee: Right. So there is something and I’ve often – every now and then I think I should put together a little paper on this but then I never get around to it. It’s called the Natural History Network and there’s a journal called the Journal of Natural History Education Experience, if I recall. It’s a little Open access journal. And could put together for that. I don’t know how that organization is running these days. The President of the organization passed away suddenly recently so I’m not sure what the story is there and how they’re – it’s sort of a small, non-paper journal. It’s all online. So I’ve often thought I should drop something into there on this but then I’m also not sure how innovative it is anymore and if anyone would actually care at this point. It’s sort of – sometimes I wonder if I missed my window for doing that or if there’s still an interest among academics about how this is done in our context. 
Interviewer: Well I think there is. In my context people are still like “Why would I do that? What would it look like? And what would be the benefits?” and I think you’ve got some of that. 
Interviewee: Right. 
Interviewer: Coming out. At least in your experience. 
Interviewee: Cool, thanks. That’s good to know. 
Interviewer: Go ahead. 
Interviewee: No, that’s all. 
Interviewer: In terms of norms in higher education and teaching and how we engage with communities, how do you feel this is aligning with existing norms? Our Mission and Vision for universities in society?
Interviewee: Yeah, I mean I often hear – you’ll often hear these sorts of – and you see these sorts of articles about how the lecture is dead and, you know, even the lectures are almost abusive and blah, blah, blah, in some situations. And I don’t quite buy into that because the funny thing is oftentimes when we hear these things coming at us it’s coming at us in lecture form. So I think the lectures are still a vital portion but I think that we need to look at different ways of sometimes delivering that lecture material or look at different ways of giving assignments that are afforded to us. So I’m also a journal editor, for instance, and the journal I edit for we still mail out copies to a few subscribers and libraries and stuff. So this is sort of an analogy here. A lot of that whole publishing – the whole publishing apparatus we have set up and still runs in this traditional fashion is based on the printing press and the mail system and we’ve gone well beyond that. So it doesn’t mean that journals are dead and that type of dissemination of information is dead, it just means that things change. The same goes for lecturing or the types of assignments that you can give to students, it shifts because technology affords us a way of doing it differently and to some extend better. There’s challenges as well, obviously, if we go back to the journal analogy there you end up with all these online Open access journals, some of which are great and reputable and then a bunch of really predatory terrible things. 
So you end up with new challenges but that’s not to say that the previous paper-based model didn’t have it’s own challenges and the same goes for this too. It’s – there’s…I just think that paper journals are just going to – or at least paper aspects of journals, those journals will survive but they won’t be mailing out copies to people over the next five years or less, I think that our teaching has to change as well. So using some of these new capabilities is a good thing to do that way. Because it does afford students new ways of approaching the material. They’re also entering a world where that is going to be the way of presenting information, well it already is the way of presenting information. And writing a term paper is not a bad thing necessarily either because they’re also entering a world where they’re going to have a write a fifteen or twenty page report, you know, based on this research that they did or to propose something or whatever it happens to be. So you know, I guess a criticism of what I’m doing I’m taking that out of the pedagogy, or the course material, and I’m dropping in this other way of doing things but my response will be “well they’re still getting that in other courses. I can guarantee it.” So just because I’m not doing blogging and term papers doesn’t necessarily mean that just my – an education is more than one course. And if I ever got to the point where everybody was handing out blog assignments or something like that – I doubt that will ever happen but if it ever got to that point – I’d say “okay kids time for a term paper!” You know? That sort of thing. It has to be well-rounded. There has to be opportunities to express yourself in different ways across a degree and learn to relate to the world that you’re going to be stepping into as well. 
Interviewer: Yeah that’s an interesting idea about – I mean it’s a whole other study. How do we make sure that students experience in a number of courses in a program is diverse enough that they get a chance to do some blog posts, that they get a chance to write some papers, maybe get a chance to do a presentation, and they’re not getting too much of any one thing?
Interviewee: Yeah and it’s hard to coordinate that because I don’t necessarily know what – I know what happens in my courses and I teach about four courses here so that’s a pretty good chunk of a biology degree. But I don’t know what happens necessarily in my, you know, even in my next door office neighbour’s courses specifically unless I ask and even then I don’t know how that necessarily integrates with what I’m doing. So I mean universities are funny that way. I think as you move from elementary school to high school it shifts a little bit that way once you move out of high school into college or university or technical school, it really shifts to the point where different instructors really have no clue what’s happening in the next door classroom. 
Interviewer: Only the student knows.
Interviewee: The student knows, I know! And oftentimes they don’t tell you and every now and then they do. And it’s, sort of, helpful when they do. Often at that point it’s already too late because you’re train has gone down the track, you know, open that bridge. 
Interviewer: I just wanted to return back to your learning design because I had a thought. If you’re doing this every year, so there’s a collection being formed, is the collection like a giant collection of years of student works or is there a separate collection for each time you do it?
Interviewee: It’s sort of varied. Obviously I’ve been on different platforms. So I’ve been on Blogger and then just straight up WordPress thing and then this new thing that [colleague name] has pulled out. In previous years with the two previous platforms that I used I had a different one for each year. But then I would refer students back to those blogs because they would often sit around and stay archived for a while in the system and they can look back to see what other students had done. 
More recently with this system that [colleague name] has me running on, I just keep on using the same one every year. So one class will have one blog, the other class with have another blog, and so I’ll let students go back to other years’ work as well and see…I mean they don’t see what the mark is or anything like that or the comments on the blog post but they should be able to at least see how other people approached it. And maybe discern what a good post is compared to a not so good post on their own. There’s pros and cons to that. It means that if we keep on accruing material, you know, down the line students will have one idea and scroll through and go “oh my goodness someone did that two years ago or three years ago I can’t do this” you know, that sort of thing. So there is that type of a con aspect there. But a pro aspect is that they can look back and see what other students have done. So we are building an archive currently. But the reality too is as soon as the next great system comes along and [colleague name] shifts me over to that thing, this one will move into the internet backwater somewhere and…because if you asked me now to find the blog – one of my blogs from 2007 I would not even know how – I guess I could sign up to my Google account and see if I can dig up that old Blogger thing. I don’t even know if it’s there anymore, I haven’t looked at it for years. 
Interviewer: Could you comment on your own teaching philosophy or beliefs about knowledge and how it might feed into your work?
Interviewee: Well I guess I’m a scientist primarily in terms of my research and my studies. I started in Humanities and then moved off into Science, so it wasn’t an official Liberal Arts education but probably a good half of my undergraduate was Humanities and then I moved over. So I understand these – the difference and the similarities in these larger disciplines. I really do tend to push in, especially my third and fourth year courses, scientific method type thinking. So hypothesis development, developing predictions, testing the predictions, and then revising the hypothesis and going around in that circle. I’m’ a big believer in that in terms of how…I guess I don’t know – for lack of a better word – progress is made in society as well. We’ve – it’s hard to argue that science doesn’t work. I also believe that…I believe that anyone at any time in any place can practise science. A lot of people say that it’s a Western construct and I guess, you know, sort of stemming out of the Enlightenment a little bit, it is but it’s not the sort of thing that other people in other places weren’t doing and aren’t’ still doing separately. Just because it was really pushed forward out of Europe, for instance. But I don’t necessarily believe that all types of knowledge seeking are science. Nor do I think all types of knowledge seeking beyond science are invalid. I just think that science does a heck of a good job and there are cultural aspects to the scientific approach to things, obviously. Probably because of it’s sort of Enlightenment foundations. But that said it’s spread beyond your typical European culture into well beyond that. And like I also said people were doing this sort of work well prior to the Renaissance and in many different places and they continue to, as well. So sometimes it’s more difficult to identify what that looks like in other times and other places and other cultures and sometimes things are claimed to be science in any culture even in our own Western culture you have people claiming things are science when they are not. I mean one of the prime examples of that is the Young Earth creationism in a Western context. It’s a very Western-y thing but it just ain’t science because there is – it’s not – I guess, you know, initially sure you could test some of these hypotheses but they failed repetitively so it’s time to move on to something else. And most of what goes on in that realm these days is claimed to be science. It is not science. So sometimes differentiating that – getting the point across I guess to students that science can be done by any – this thing that we call science – can be done by anyone at any time in any place and it indeed has been, but also everything that is called science is actually science. And that there are other ways of figuring out the world around you as well. But the reason that science has been so successful is that – the scientific method has been so successful any how is because it is very effective and very efficient at doing that type of thing and bringing us closer to the truth. The realization being that we are never actually bumping into the “big T” Truth. But when something works really well, this compute that we’re talking – this whole system that we’re talking through – is based on a great deal of background scientific research in many fields. When it works really well and we’re able to do things like this, we know that we’re approaching particular physical and computer science-y and chemical and whatever other things were put together to make these things work, we’re approaching the truth pretty closely because we can pull off things that our ancestors couldn’t and they were approaching truth more than their ancestors were as well with the work that they did to get to that technological place. So, I don’t know. That’s a long – I just wrote a blog post or a term paper right there, probably. There have been many term papers written, I’m sure about that. 
Interviewer: I think I heard you kind of say that you want students to recognize that they can contribute to science and some of the ways that you’re getting them to engage and share and engage in scholarly communication, this might be one way.
Interviewee: Absolutely and this goes with some of my grad students in my lab, too. They run into some road block in their lab experiment, whatever it happens to be, and you know what’s the way to figure out what that is? Well you need to have a control and several treatments and you need to replicate it and figure out – I’m hypothesizing that this PCR reaction isn’t working, well I know this PCR reaction isn’t working and I’m hypothesizing that my enzyme is dead, so what do you do? You run a control with no enzyme, you run it with the enzyme that you’ve been using, and you go and you go get another tube of enzyme from another lab that you know has been working and you run the same reaction two or three times and, you know, low and behold, yeah, your reaction doesn’t do anything. It’s sort of boring and mundane but you now know that the enzyme that you had sitting in the fridge has become denatured and you need to go buy a new tube of it. That’s not publishable by any means. Who cares? But you care because you’ve moved forward to the next stage in your project. And we do this in the kitchen when we bake, we do it probably with our kids or our pets in terms of what works and what doesn’t work as well. You do it – everyone does it all the time. You’re totally right, it’s a way of approaching trust rapidly and effectively if done correctly. But again, it’s never done without bias of some sort or another. So that’s something else that I try to get into students’ minds as well. In Animal Behaviour we talk about anthropomorphizing animals, right? And so attributing emotions and things like that to a grasshopper probably isn’t – you probably can’t develop a study off that very well but people might start doing it to their house cat or something like that. And that’s not necessarily a bad thing to do. But it’s not necessarily also going to be effective. So you have a bias because it’s a cute animal, maybe it has particular emotions. Maybe! And that’s what you can test but you can’t test other things. You know, why is it choosing all of its young except for this one runt kitten? It’s not because it’s mad at that kitten or various other reasons. There’s other – so you can’t – you have to be careful of the biases you bring to things as well. We all do it without thinking. 
Interviewer: So I guess the last – well two questions to finish here. One of them was, I mean, you’ve kind of touched on it already, is how some of the activities you’re getting students to do with blogging is leading to – it’s hard to get the empirical evidence for this – how is it leading to meaningful learning for them? Or what is your sense of how it may be helping them in your discipline?
Interviewee: Yeah, I don’t know. I’ve often thought about trying to quantify it somehow and I’m not sure how I would and most of my classes here are reasonably small here so it makes it a bit more difficult for numbers. My hope is that they walk out of here having done two or three of these exercises across their degree, thinking more about how they can relate information. It’s always a temptation I think especially once you’ve learned something for the first time and you think it’s really cool to make sure everyone knows that you are pretty smart about this thing and make it seem really complex and amazing to everybody but I think it’s – I’m trying to get across to them that being able to relate it is actually where the learning has come in. So if they’re to step out of this degree and into a biological consulting job or a research position or even, you know, working in an insurance company somewhere and be able to explain the complexities of insurance law or policy to a client, they obviously are going to have a great deal more information after their insurance courses but the client doesn’t want to know every nitty gritty detail, they want to know – so being able to do that, if that’s where this took them then – woops…I think I moved the screen funny – if that’s where this takes them then I feel like I’ve succeeded. I don’t know how to measure that, though because it’s going to happen when they’re actually working at their insurance company or their consulting job. and I don’t know how to ask those – I don’t know how to find them most of the time once they’ve left here, so that’s the problem.
Interviewer: So the activity’s really about getting them to connect the theory and concepts that they’re learning to the real world and be able to describe how that works?
Interviewee: Yeah, and so in the context of biology it’s taking these biological – complex biological – concepts and doing that but then being able to do – hopefully having at least this framework to be able to do that in whatever they end up doing if it is insurance sales or right in their field, biological consulting or something like that, being able to not baffle gab people. You know, so someone can talk to them and ten, twenty minutes later have a really good understanding of what product they need to buy or whatever. You know, what works best for them. 
Interviewer: Cool. Are there any other things you want to mention? Or things you thought I was going to ask but didn’t?
Interviewee: Um…no I think we’ve covered a lot general blogging concepts, to be honest. But if I think of anything I’ll fire you an email. But I think we’ve hit on a lot of them. 
Interviewer: Yeah, please feel free to follow up if you wish or if anything comes to mind. [colleague name] sent me some of your URLs so I’ve got the Bio sites that are set up there. But if there is anything in particular that you want to show me, or even an example of student work that kind of resonated with you. If it’s like “this is interesting, they’ve kind of…” that could be useful as well. 
Interviewee: For sure. Good, good. This is really cool so I’m interested to see where this goes. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I really appreciate your time. I’ll follow up with the transcript. It could be a couple of weeks or so before I can get that to you, and you can make the decision to make it Open. I’ve also got the audio and video captured, if you want that you’re welcome to it. 
Interviewee: I don’t need to hear and see myself. 
Interviewer: Yeah, it’s kind of awkward. And I’m lucky to be able to offer you a small token of gratitude for your time today. It’s just a $25 gift card to Chapters, so you can get yourself some more reading materials. 
Interviewee: Oh, cool. That’s great. Thank you very much, that’s very nice of you. 
Interviewer: Yeah, I’ll send that along shortly. 
Interviewee: Good, thanks! 
Interviewer: So thanks a lot I really enjoyed the conversation. 
Interviewee: Yeah, thanks. Good luck with it all. 
Interviewer: Thanks, cheers. 
Interviewee: Bye.